---
layout: post
title: "CUBIT: Concurrent Updatable Bitmap Indexing"
author: "Junchang Wang, Manos Athanassoulis"
thumb: "/images/library/thumbs/vldb.svg"
image: "/images/library/thumbs/vldb.png"
tags: ["Paper"]
thirdparty: true
excerpt: ""
---

[Paper (PDF)](https://www.vldb.org/pvldb/vol18/p399-athanassoulis.pdf)

Venue: VLDB 2025

## Abstract

Bitmap indexes are widely used for read-intensive analytical workloads because they are clustered and offer efficient reads with a small memory footprint. However, they are generally inefficient to update. As analytical applications are increasingly fused with transactional applications, leading to the emergence of hybrid transactional/analytical processing (HTAP), it is desirable that bitmap indexes support efficient concurrent real-time updates. In this paper, we propose Concurrent Updatable Bitmap indexing (CUBIT) that offers efficient real-time updates that scale with the number of CPU cores used and do not interfere with queries. Our design relies on three principles. First, we employ a horizontal bitwise representation of updated bits, which enables efficient atomic updates without locking entire bitvectors. Second, we propose a lightweight snapshotting mechanism that allows queries to run on separate snapshots and provides a wait-free progress guarantee. Third, we consolidate updates in a latch-free manner, providing a strong progress guarantee. Our evaluation shows that CUBIT offers 3-16x higher throughput and 3-220x lower latency than state-of-the-art updatable bitmap indexes. CUBIT's update-friendly nature widens the applicability of bitmap indexing. Experimenting with OLAP workloads with standard, batched updates shows that CUBIT overcomes the maintenance downtime and outperforms DuckDB by 1.2-2.7x on TPC-H. For HTAP workloads with real-time updates, CUBIT achieves 2-11x performance improvement over the state-of-the-art approaches.
