docs/sql/data_types/nulls.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: NULL Values
selected: Documentation/Data Types/NULL Values
expanded: Data Types
blurb: The NULL value represents a missing value.
---

`NULL` values are special values that are used to represent missing data in SQL. Columns of any type can contain `NULL` values. Logically, a `NULL` value can be seen as "we don't know the value of this field".

```sql
-- insert a null value into a table
CREATE TABLE integers(i INTEGER);
INSERT INTO integers VALUES (NULL);
```

`NULL` values have special semantics in many parts of the query as well as in many functions:

> Any comparison with a `NULL` value returns `NULL`, including `NULL=NULL`.

You can use `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` to perform an equality comparison where `NULL` values compare equal to each other. Use `IS (NOT) NULL` to check if a value is NULL.

```sql
SELECT NULL=NULL;
-- returns NULL
SELECT NULL IS NOT DISTINCT FROM NULL;
-- returns true
SELECT NULL IS NULL;
-- returns true
```

## NULL and Functions

A function that has input argument as `NULL` **usually** returns `NULL`.

```sql
SELECT COS(NULL);
-- NULL
```

`COALESCE` is an exception to this. `COALESCE` takes any number of arguments, and returns for each row the first argument that is not `NULL`. If all arguments are `NULL`, `COALESCE` also returns `NULL`.

```sql
SELECT COALESCE(NULL, NULL, 1);
-- 1
SELECT COALESCE(10, 20);
-- 10
SELECT COALESCE(NULL, NULL);
-- NULL
```

## NULL and Conjunctions

`NULL` values have special semantics in `AND`/`OR` conjunctions. For the ternary logic truth tables, see the [Boolean Type documentation](/docs/sql/data_types/boolean).

## NULL and Aggregate Functions

`NULL` values are ignored in most aggregate functions.

```sql
CREATE TABLE integers(i INTEGER);
INSERT INTO integers VALUES (1), (10), (NULL);

SELECT MIN(i) FROM integers;
-- 1

SELECT MAX(i) FROM integers;
-- 10
```

Commit message:

Mentioned aggregates that include NULL

docs/sql/data_types/nulls.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: NULL Values
selected: Documentation/Data Types/NULL Values
expanded: Data Types
blurb: The NULL value represents a missing value.
---

`NULL` values are special values that are used to represent missing data in SQL. Columns of any type can contain `NULL` values. Logically, a `NULL` value can be seen as "the value of this field is unknown".

```sql
-- insert a null value into a table
CREATE TABLE integers(i INTEGER);
INSERT INTO integers VALUES (NULL);
```

`NULL` values have special semantics in many parts of the query as well as in many functions:

> Any comparison with a `NULL` value returns `NULL`, including `NULL=NULL`.

You can use `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM` to perform an equality comparison where `NULL` values compare equal to each other. Use `IS (NOT) NULL` to check if a value is NULL.

```sql
SELECT NULL=NULL;
-- returns NULL
SELECT NULL IS NOT DISTINCT FROM NULL;
-- returns true
SELECT NULL IS NULL;
-- returns true
```

## NULL and Functions

A function that has input argument as `NULL` **usually** returns `NULL`.

```sql
SELECT COS(NULL);
-- NULL
```

`COALESCE` is an exception to this. `COALESCE` takes any number of arguments, and returns for each row the first argument that is not `NULL`. If all arguments are `NULL`, `COALESCE` also returns `NULL`.

```sql
SELECT COALESCE(NULL, NULL, 1);
-- 1
SELECT COALESCE(10, 20);
-- 10
SELECT COALESCE(NULL, NULL);
-- NULL
```

## NULL and Conjunctions

`NULL` values have special semantics in `AND`/`OR` conjunctions. For the ternary logic truth tables, see the [Boolean Type documentation](/docs/sql/data_types/boolean).

## NULL and Aggregate Functions

`NULL` values are ignored in most aggregate functions. 

Aggregate functions that do not ignore `NULL` values include: `FIRST`, `LAST`, `LIST`, and `ARRAY_AGG`. To exclude `NULL` values from those aggregate functions, the [`FILTER` clause](/docs/sql/query_syntax/filter) can be used.

```sql
CREATE TABLE integers(i INTEGER);
INSERT INTO integers VALUES (1), (10), (NULL);

SELECT MIN(i) FROM integers;
-- 1

SELECT MAX(i) FROM integers;
-- 10
```
