docs/sql/data_types/timestamp.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Timestamp Type
selected: Documentation/Data Types/Timestamp
expanded: Data Types
blurb: A timestamp specifies a combination of a date (year, month, day) and a time (hour, minute, second, millisecond).
---
Timestamps represent points in absolute time, usually called *instants*.
DuckDB represents instants as the number of microseconds (µs) since `1970-01-01 00:00:00+00`.

| Name | Aliases | Description |
|:---|:---|:---|
| `TIMESTAMP` | datetime | time of day (ignores time zone) |
| `TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE` | `TIMESTAMPTZ` | time of day (uses time zone) |

A timestamp specifies a combination of `DATE` (year, month, day) and a `TIME` (hour, minute, second, millisecond). Timestamps can be created using the `TIMESTAMP` keyword, where the data must be formatted according to the ISO 8601 format (`YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss[.zzzzzz][+-TT[:tt]]`).

```sql
-- 11:30 AM at 20 September, 1992 GMT
SELECT TIMESTAMP '1992-09-20 11:30:00';
-- 2:30 PM at 20 September, 1992 GMT
SELECT TIMESTAMP '1992-09-20 14:30:00';
```

## Functions
See [Timestamp Functions](/docs/sql/functions/timestamp).

## Time Zones
The `TIMESTAMPTZ` type can be binned into calendar and clock bins using a suitable extension.
The built in ICU extension implements all the binning and arithmetic functions using the
[International Components for Unicode](https://icu.unicode.org) time zone and calendar functions.

To set the time zone to use, load the ICU extension and use the `Set TimeZone` command:

```sql
require icu

Set TimeZone='Americas/Los_Angeles';
```

Time binning operations for `TIMESTAMPTZ` will then be implemented using the given time zone.

A list of available time zones can be pulled from the `pg_timezone_names()` table function:

```sql
SELECT name, abbrev, utc_offset FROM pg_timezone_names() ORDER BY name;
```

## Calendars
The ICU extension also supports non-Gregorian calendars using the `Set Calendar` command:

```sql
require icu

Set Calendar='japanese';
```

Time binning operations for `TIMESTAMPTZ` will then be implemented using the given calendar.
In  this example, the `era` part will now report the Japanese imperial era number.

A list of available calendars can be pulled from the `icu_calendar_names()` table function:

```sql
SELECT name FROM icu_calendar_names() ORDER BY 1;
```

## Settings
The current value of the `TimeZone` and `Calendar` settings are determined by ICU when it starts up.
They can be looked from in the `duckdb_settings()` table function:

```sql
SELECT * FROM duckdb_settings() WHERE name = 'TimeZone';
-- Americas/Los_Angeles
SELECT * FROM duckdb_settings() WHERE name = 'Calendar';
-- gregorian
```

Commit message:

Mention ICU bundling in some clients.

docs/sql/data_types/timestamp.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Timestamp Type
selected: Documentation/Data Types/Timestamp
expanded: Data Types
blurb: A timestamp specifies a combination of a date (year, month, day) and a time (hour, minute, second, millisecond).
---
Timestamps represent points in absolute time, usually called *instants*.
DuckDB represents instants as the number of microseconds (µs) since `1970-01-01 00:00:00+00`.

| Name | Aliases | Description |
|:---|:---|:---|
| `TIMESTAMP` | datetime | time of day (ignores time zone) |
| `TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE` | `TIMESTAMPTZ` | time of day (uses time zone) |

A timestamp specifies a combination of `DATE` (year, month, day) and a `TIME` (hour, minute, second, millisecond). Timestamps can be created using the `TIMESTAMP` keyword, where the data must be formatted according to the ISO 8601 format (`YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss[.zzzzzz][+-TT[:tt]]`).

```sql
-- 11:30 AM at 20 September, 1992 GMT
SELECT TIMESTAMP '1992-09-20 11:30:00';
-- 2:30 PM at 20 September, 1992 GMT
SELECT TIMESTAMP '1992-09-20 14:30:00';
```

## Functions
See [Timestamp Functions](/docs/sql/functions/timestamp).

## Time Zones
The `TIMESTAMPTZ` type can be binned into calendar and clock bins using a suitable extension.
The built in ICU extension implements all the binning and arithmetic functions using the
[International Components for Unicode](https://icu.unicode.org) time zone and calendar functions.

To set the time zone to use, first load the ICU extension. The ICU extension comes pre-bundled
with several DuckDB clients (including Python), so this step can be skipped in those cases.

```sql
require icu
```

Next, use the `Set TimeZone` command:

```sql
Set TimeZone='Americas/Los_Angeles';
```

Time binning operations for `TIMESTAMPTZ` will then be implemented using the given time zone.

A list of available time zones can be pulled from the `pg_timezone_names()` table function:

```sql
SELECT 
    name,
    abbrev,
    utc_offset 
FROM pg_timezone_names() 
ORDER BY 
    name;
```


## Calendars
The ICU extension also supports non-Gregorian calendars using the `Set Calendar` command.
Note that the `require icu` step is only required if the DuckDB client does not bundle the
ICU extension. 

```sql
require icu

Set Calendar='japanese';
```

Time binning operations for `TIMESTAMPTZ` will then be implemented using the given calendar.
In  this example, the `era` part will now report the Japanese imperial era number.

A list of available calendars can be pulled from the `icu_calendar_names()` table function:

```sql
SELECT name FROM icu_calendar_names() ORDER BY 1;
```

## Settings
The current value of the `TimeZone` and `Calendar` settings are determined by ICU when it starts up.
They can be looked from in the `duckdb_settings()` table function:

```sql
SELECT * FROM duckdb_settings() WHERE name = 'TimeZone';
-- Americas/Los_Angeles
SELECT * FROM duckdb_settings() WHERE name = 'Calendar';
-- gregorian
```
