docs/guides/python/filesystems.md, before:

---
title: Filesystems
layout: docu
---

> This feature is experimental, and is subject to change

DuckDB support for [`fsspec`](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io) filesystems allows querying data in filesystems that DuckDB's `httpfs` extension does not support. `fsspec` has a large number of [inbuilt filesystems](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#built-in-implementations), and there are also many [external implementations](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#other-known-implementations).

### Example

The following is an example of using `fsspec` to query a file in Google Cloud Storage (instead of using their s3 inter-compatibility api).

Firstly, you must install `duckdb` and `fsspec`, and a filesystem interface of your choice
```sh
$ pip install duckdb fsspec gcsfs
```

then you can register whichever filesystem you'd like to query

```python
import duckdb
from fsspec import filesystem

conn = duckdb.connect()
conn.register_filesystem(filesystem('gcs'))  # this line will throw an exception if the appropriate filesystem interface is not installed

conn.execute("select * from read_csv_auto('gcs:///bucket/file.csv')")

data = conn.fetchall()
```

### Potential issues

Please also note, that as these filesystems are not implemented in C++, their performance may not be comparable to the ones provided by the `httpfs` extension.
It's also worth noting that as they are third party libraries, they may contain bugs that are beyond our control.

Commit message:

Mention that it is only in Python
I know this is a little bit self-explanatory, but "better to be explicit than implicit", as they say... ;-)

docs/guides/python/filesystems.md, after:

---
title: Filesystems
layout: docu
---

> This feature is experimental, and is subject to change

DuckDB support for [`fsspec`](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io) filesystems allows querying data in filesystems that DuckDB's `httpfs` extension does not support. `fsspec` has a large number of [inbuilt filesystems](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#built-in-implementations), and there are also many [external implementations](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#other-known-implementations). This capability is only available in DuckDB's Python client because `fsspec` is a Python library, while the `httpfs` extension is available in many DuckDB clients.

### Example

The following is an example of using `fsspec` to query a file in Google Cloud Storage (instead of using their s3 inter-compatibility api).

Firstly, you must install `duckdb` and `fsspec`, and a filesystem interface of your choice
```sh
$ pip install duckdb fsspec gcsfs
```

then you can register whichever filesystem you'd like to query

```python
import duckdb
from fsspec import filesystem

conn = duckdb.connect()
conn.register_filesystem(filesystem('gcs'))  # this line will throw an exception if the appropriate filesystem interface is not installed

conn.execute("select * from read_csv_auto('gcs:///bucket/file.csv')")

data = conn.fetchall()
```

### Potential issues

Please also note, that as these filesystems are not implemented in C++, their performance may not be comparable to the ones provided by the `httpfs` extension.
It's also worth noting that as they are third party libraries, they may contain bugs that are beyond our control.
