docs/guides/meta/list_tables.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: List Tables
selected: List Tables
---

# How to list all tables

The `SHOW TABLES` command can be used to obtain a list of all tables:

```sql
SHOW TABLES;
```

To view the schema of an individual table, use the `DESCRIBE` command.

```sql
DESCRIBE nation;
```

The `DESCRIBE` command can also be used without a parameter to view all tables together with their columns and column types.

```sql
DESCRIBE;
```

Below is an example of `DESCRIBE` without any parameters on the `TPC-H` dataset.

```
┌────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┬───────────┐
│ table_name │                                    column_names                                    │                                    column_types                                    │ temporary │
├────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────┤
│ customer   │ [c_acctbal, c_address, c_comment, c_custkey, c_mktsegment, c_name, c_nationkey,... │ [DECIMAL(15,2), VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, VARCHAR]     │ false     │
│ lineitem   │ [l_comment, l_commitdate, l_discount, l_extendedprice, l_linenumber, l_linestat... │ [VARCHAR, DATE, DECIMAL(15,2), DECIMAL(15,2), INTEGER, VARCHAR, INTEGER, INTEGE... │ false     │
│ nation     │ [n_comment, n_name, n_nationkey, n_regionkey]                                      │ [VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, INTEGER]                                               │ false     │
│ orders     │ [o_clerk, o_comment, o_custkey, o_orderdate, o_orderkey, o_orderpriority, o_ord... │ [VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, DATE, INTEGER, VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, DECIMAL(1... │ false     │
│ part       │ [p_brand, p_comment, p_container, p_mfgr, p_name, p_partkey, p_retailprice, p_s... │ [VARCHAR, VARCHAR, VARCHAR, VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, DECIMAL(15,2), INTEGER, ... │ false     │
│ partsupp   │ [ps_availqty, ps_comment, ps_partkey, ps_suppkey, ps_supplycost]                   │ [INTEGER, VARCHAR, INTEGER, INTEGER, DECIMAL(15,2)]                                │ false     │
│ region     │ [r_comment, r_name, r_regionkey]                                                   │ [VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER]                                                        │ false     │
│ supplier   │ [s_acctbal, s_address, s_comment, s_name, s_nationkey, s_phone, s_suppkey]         │ [DECIMAL(15,2), VARCHAR, VARCHAR, VARCHAR, INTEGER, VARCHAR, INTEGER]              │ false     │
└────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴───────────┘
```

The SQL-standard [`information_schema`](../../sql/information_schema) views are also defined. 

DuckDB also defines `sqlite_master`, and many [Postgres system catalog tables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/catalogs.html) for compatibility with SQLite and Postgres respectively.

Commit message:

SHOW TABLES only shows tables within the current schema, SHOW ALL TABLES can be used to show all

docs/guides/meta/list_tables.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: List Tables
selected: List Tables
---

# How to list all tables

The `SHOW TABLES` command can be used to obtain a list of all tables within the selected schema.

```sql
CREATE TABLE tbl(i INTEGER);
SHOW TABLES;
```

| name |
|------|
| tbl  |

`DESCRIBE`, `SHOW` or `SHOW ALL TABLES` can be used to obtain a list of all tables within **all** attached databases and schemas.

```sql
CREATE TABLE tbl(i INTEGER);
CREATE SCHEMA s1;
CREATE TABLE s1.tbl(v VARCHAR);
SHOW ALL TABLES;
```

| database | schema | table_name | column_names | column_types | temporary |
|----------|--------|------------|--------------|--------------|-----------|
| memory   | main   | tbl        | [i]          | [INTEGER]    | false     |
| memory   | s1     | tbl        | [v]          | [VARCHAR]    | false     |

To view the schema of an individual table, use the `DESCRIBE` command.

```sql
CREATE TABLE tbl(i INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, j VARCHAR);
DESCRIBE tbl;
```

| column_name | column_type | null | key  | default | extra |
|-------------|-------------|------|------|---------|-------|
| i           | INTEGER     | NO   | PRI  | NULL    | NULL  |
| j           | VARCHAR     | YES  | NULL | NULL    | NULL  |

The SQL-standard [`information_schema`](../../sql/information_schema) views are also defined. 

DuckDB also defines `sqlite_master`, and many [Postgres system catalog tables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/catalogs.html) for compatibility with SQLite and Postgres respectively.
