docs/api/wasm/instantiation.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Instantiation
selected: Client APIs
---

## Instantiation
cdn(jsdelivr)
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';

const JSDELIVR_BUNDLES = duckdb.getJsDelivrBundles();

// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(JSDELIVR_BUNDLES);

const worker_url = URL.createObjectURL(
  new Blob([`importScripts("${bundle.mainWorker!}");`], {type: 'text/javascript'})
);

// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(worker_url);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
URL.revokeObjectURL(worker_url);
```

webpack
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';
import duckdb_wasm from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-mvp.wasm';
import duckdb_wasm_next from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-eh.wasm';
const MANUAL_BUNDLES: duckdb.DuckDBBundles = {
    mvp: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm,
        mainWorker: new URL('@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-mvp.worker.js', import.meta.url).toString(),
    },
    eh: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm_next,
        mainWorker: new URL('@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-eh.worker.js', import.meta.url).toString(),
    },
};
// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(MANUAL_BUNDLES);
// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(bundle.mainWorker!);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
```
vite
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';
import duckdb_wasm from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-mvp.wasm?url';
import mvp_worker from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-mvp.worker.js?url';
import duckdb_wasm_eh from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-eh.wasm?url';
import eh_worker from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-eh.worker.js?url';

const MANUAL_BUNDLES: duckdb.DuckDBBundles = {
    mvp: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm,
        mainWorker: mvp_worker,
    },
    eh: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm_eh,
        mainWorker: eh_worker,
    },
};
// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(MANUAL_BUNDLES);
// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(bundle.mainWorker!);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
```
static served(manually download the files from https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/)
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';

const MANUAL_BUNDLES: duckdb.DuckDBBundles = {
    mvp: {
        mainModule: 'change/me/../duckdb-mvp.wasm',
        mainWorker: 'change/me/../duckdb-browser-mvp.worker.js',
    },
    eh: {
        mainModule: 'change/m/../duckdb-eh.wasm',
        mainWorker: 'change/m/../duckdb-browser-eh.worker.js',
    },
};
// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(JSDELIVR_BUNDLES);
// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(bundle.mainWorker!);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
```

Commit message:

Rollback to old wasm.md + add introduction for wasm subpages

docs/api/wasm/instantiation.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Instantiation
selected: Client APIs
---

DuckDB-wasm has multiple ways to be instantiated depending on the use case.

## Instantiation
cdn(jsdelivr)
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';

const JSDELIVR_BUNDLES = duckdb.getJsDelivrBundles();

// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(JSDELIVR_BUNDLES);

const worker_url = URL.createObjectURL(
  new Blob([`importScripts("${bundle.mainWorker!}");`], {type: 'text/javascript'})
);

// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(worker_url);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
URL.revokeObjectURL(worker_url);
```

webpack
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';
import duckdb_wasm from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-mvp.wasm';
import duckdb_wasm_next from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-eh.wasm';
const MANUAL_BUNDLES: duckdb.DuckDBBundles = {
    mvp: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm,
        mainWorker: new URL('@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-mvp.worker.js', import.meta.url).toString(),
    },
    eh: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm_next,
        mainWorker: new URL('@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-eh.worker.js', import.meta.url).toString(),
    },
};
// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(MANUAL_BUNDLES);
// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(bundle.mainWorker!);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
```
vite
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';
import duckdb_wasm from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-mvp.wasm?url';
import mvp_worker from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-mvp.worker.js?url';
import duckdb_wasm_eh from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-eh.wasm?url';
import eh_worker from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/duckdb-browser-eh.worker.js?url';

const MANUAL_BUNDLES: duckdb.DuckDBBundles = {
    mvp: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm,
        mainWorker: mvp_worker,
    },
    eh: {
        mainModule: duckdb_wasm_eh,
        mainWorker: eh_worker,
    },
};
// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(MANUAL_BUNDLES);
// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(bundle.mainWorker!);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
```
static served(manually download the files from https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@duckdb/duckdb-wasm/dist/)
```ts
import * as duckdb from '@duckdb/duckdb-wasm';

const MANUAL_BUNDLES: duckdb.DuckDBBundles = {
    mvp: {
        mainModule: 'change/me/../duckdb-mvp.wasm',
        mainWorker: 'change/me/../duckdb-browser-mvp.worker.js',
    },
    eh: {
        mainModule: 'change/m/../duckdb-eh.wasm',
        mainWorker: 'change/m/../duckdb-browser-eh.worker.js',
    },
};
// Select a bundle based on browser checks
const bundle = await duckdb.selectBundle(JSDELIVR_BUNDLES);
// Instantiate the asynchronus version of DuckDB-wasm
const worker = new Worker(bundle.mainWorker!);
const logger = new duckdb.ConsoleLogger();
const db = new duckdb.AsyncDuckDB(logger, worker);
await db.instantiate(bundle.mainModule, bundle.pthreadWorker);
```
