docs/api/wasm/query.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Query
selected: Client APIs
---

## Query Execution

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();

// Either materialize the query result
await conn.query<{ v: arrow.Int }>(`
    SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 100) t(v)
`);
// ..., or fetch the result chunks lazily
for await (const batch of await conn.send<{ v: arrow.Int }>(`
    SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 100) t(v)
`)) {
    // ...
}
// Close the connection to release memory
await conn.close();
```

## Prepared Statements

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();
// Prepare query
const stmt = await conn.prepare(`SELECT v + ? FROM generate_series(0, 10000) as t(v);`);
// ... and run the query with materialized results
await stmt.query(234);
// ... or result chunks
for await (const batch of await stmt.send(234)) {
    // ...
}
// Close the statement to release memory
await stmt.close();
// Closing the connection will release statements as well
await conn.close();
```

## Arrow Table to JSON

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();

// Query
const arrowResult = await conn.query<{ v: arrow.Int }>(`
    SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 100) t(v)
`);

// Convert arrow table to json
const result = arrowResult.toArray().map((row) => row.toJSON());

// Close the connection to release memory
await conn.close();
```

## Export Parquet

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();

// Export Parquet
conn.send(`COPY (SELECT * FROM tbl) TO 'result-snappy.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet');`);
const parquet_buffer = await this._db.copyFileToBuffer('result-snappy.parquet');

// Generate a download link
const link = URL.createObjectURL(new Blob([parquet_buffer]));

// Close the connection to release memory
await conn.close();
```

Commit message:

Rollback to old wasm.md + add introduction for wasm subpages

docs/api/wasm/query.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Query
selected: Client APIs
---

DuckDB-wasm provides functions to querying the data. Queries is run sequentially. 

First, a connection need to be created by calling [connect](https://shell.duckdb.org/docs/classes/index.AsyncDuckDB.html#connect). Then, queries can be run by calling [query](https://shell.duckdb.org/docs/classes/index.AsyncDuckDBConnection.html#query) or [send](https://shell.duckdb.org/docs/classes/index.AsyncDuckDBConnection.html#send).

## Query Execution

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();

// Either materialize the query result
await conn.query<{ v: arrow.Int }>(`
    SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 100) t(v)
`);
// ..., or fetch the result chunks lazily
for await (const batch of await conn.send<{ v: arrow.Int }>(`
    SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 100) t(v)
`)) {
    // ...
}
// Close the connection to release memory
await conn.close();
```

## Prepared Statements

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();
// Prepare query
const stmt = await conn.prepare(`SELECT v + ? FROM generate_series(0, 10000) as t(v);`);
// ... and run the query with materialized results
await stmt.query(234);
// ... or result chunks
for await (const batch of await stmt.send(234)) {
    // ...
}
// Close the statement to release memory
await stmt.close();
// Closing the connection will release statements as well
await conn.close();
```

## Arrow Table to JSON

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();

// Query
const arrowResult = await conn.query<{ v: arrow.Int }>(`
    SELECT * FROM generate_series(1, 100) t(v)
`);

// Convert arrow table to json
const result = arrowResult.toArray().map((row) => row.toJSON());

// Close the connection to release memory
await conn.close();
```

## Export Parquet

```ts
// Create a new connection
const conn = await db.connect();

// Export Parquet
conn.send(`COPY (SELECT * FROM tbl) TO 'result-snappy.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet');`);
const parquet_buffer = await this._db.copyFileToBuffer('result-snappy.parquet');

// Generate a download link
const link = URL.createObjectURL(new Blob([parquet_buffer]));

// Close the connection to release memory
await conn.close();
```
