docs/extensions/full_text_search.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Full Text Search
selected: Documentation/Full Text Search
---
Full Text Search is an extension to DuckDB that allows for search through strings, similar to SQLite's FTS5 extension.

# API
The extension adds two `PRAGMA` statements to DuckDB: one to create, and one to drop an index. Additionally, a scalar macro `stem` is added, which is used internally by the extension.

### PRAGMA create_fts_index
```
create_fts_index(input_table, input_id, *input_values, stemmer='porter', stopwords='english',
                 ignore='(\\.|[^a-z])+', strip_accents=TRUE, lower=TRUE, overwrite=FALSE)
```
`PRAGMA` that creates a FTS index for the specified table.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|`input_table`|`VARCHAR`|Qualified name of specified table e.g. `'table_name'` or `'main.table_name'`|
|`input_id`|`VARCHAR`|Column name of document identifier e.g. `'document_identifier'`|
|`\*input_values`|`VARCHAR`|Column names of the text fields to be indexed (vararg) e.g. `'text_field_1'`, `'text_field_2'`, ..., `'text_field_N'`, or `'\*'` for all columns in input_table of type `VARCHAR`|
|`stemmer`|`VARCHAR`|The type of stemmer to be used. One of `'arabic'`, `'basque'`, `'catalan'`, `'danish'`, `'dutch'`, `'english'`, `'finnish'`, `'french'`, `'german'`, `'greek'`, `'hindi'`, `'hungarian'`, `'indonesian'`, `'irish'`, `'italian'`, `'lithuanian'`, `'nepali'`, `'norwegian'`, `'porter'`, `'portuguese'`, `'romanian'`, `'russian'`, `'serbian'`, `'spanish'`, `'swedish'`, `'tamil'`, `'turkish'`, or `'none'` if no stemming is to be used. Defaults to `'porter'`|
|`stopwords`|`VARCHAR`|Qualified name of table containing a single `VARCHAR` column containing the desired stopwords, or `'none'` if no stopwords are to be used. Defaults to `'english'` for a pre-defined list of 571 English stopwords|
|`ignore`|`VARCHAR`|Regular expression of patterns to be ignored. Defaults to `'(\\.|[^a-z])+'`, ignoring all escaped and non-alphabetic lowercase characters|
|`strip_accents`|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to remove accents (e.g. convert `á` to `a`). Defaults to `TRUE`|
|`lower`|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to convert all text to lowercase. Defaults to `TRUE`|
|`overwrite`|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to overwrite an existing index on a table. Defaults to `FALSE`|

This `PRAGMA` builds the index under a newly created schema. The schema will be named after the input table: if an index is created on table `'main.table_name'`, then the schema will be named `'fts_main_table_name'`.

### PRAGMA drop_fts_index
```
drop_fts_index(input_table)
```

Drops a FTS index for the specified table.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|input_table|`VARCHAR`|Qualified name of input table e.g. `'table_name'` or `'main.table_name'`|

### match_bm25
```
match_bm25(input_id, query_string, fields := NULL, k := 1.2, b:= 0.75, conjunctive := 0)
```
When an index is built, this retrieval macro is created that can be used to search the index.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|input_id|`VARCHAR`|Column name of document identifier e.g. `'document_identifier'`|
|query_string|`VARCHAR`|The string to search the index for|
|fields|`VARCHAR`|Comma-separarated list of fields to search in e.g. `'text_field_2,text_field_N'`. Defaults to `NULL` to search all indexed fields|
|k|`DOUBLE`|Parameter _k<sub>1</sub>_ in the Okapi BM25 retrieval model. Defaults to `1.2`|
|b|`DOUBLE`|Parameter _b_ in the Okapi BM25 retrieval model. Defaults to `0.75`|
|conjunctive|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to make the query conjunctive i.e. all terms in the query string must be present in order for a document to be retrieved|

### stem
```
stem(input_string, stemmer)
```
Reduces words to their base. Used internally by the extension.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|input_string|`VARCHAR`|The column or constant to be stemmed|
|stemmer|`VARCHAR`|The type of stemmer to be used. One of `'arabic'`, `'basque'`, `'catalan'`, `'danish'`, `'dutch'`, `'english'`, `'finnish'`, `'french'`, `'german'`, `'greek'`, `'hindi'`, `'hungarian'`, `'indonesian'`, `'irish'`, `'italian'`, `'lithuanian'`, `'nepali'`, `'norwegian'`, `'porter'`, `'portuguese'`, `'romanian'`, `'russian'`, `'serbian'`, `'spanish'`, `'swedish'`, `'tamil'`, `'turkish'`, or `'none'` if no stemming is to be used.|


# Example Usage

```sql
-- create a table and fill it with text data
CREATE TABLE documents(document_identifier VARCHAR, text_content VARCHAR, author VARCHAR, doc_version INTEGER);
INSERT INTO documents
VALUES ('doc1', 'The mallard is a dabbling duck that breeds throughout the temperate.','Hannes Mühleisen', 3),
       ('doc2', 'The cat is a domestic species of small carnivorous mammal.', 'Laurens Kuiper', 2);
-- build the index (make both the 'text_content' and 'author' columns searchable)
PRAGMA create_fts_index('documents', 'document_identifier', 'text_content', 'author');
-- search the 'author' field index for documents that are written by Hannes - this retrieves 'doc1'
SELECT text_content, score
FROM (SELECT *, fts_main_documents.match_bm25(document_identifier, 'Muhleisen', fields := 'author') AS score
      FROM documents) sq
WHERE score IS NOT NULL
  AND doc_version > 2
ORDER BY score DESC;
-- search for documents about 'small cats' - this retrieves 'doc2'
SELECT text_content, score
FROM (SELECT *, fts_main_documents.match_bm25(document_identifier, 'small cats') AS score
      FROM documents) sq
WHERE score IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY score DESC;
```

Commit message:

Add caveat for FTS index
As a follow-up of https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/issues/3543

docs/extensions/full_text_search.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Full Text Search
selected: Documentation/Full Text Search
---
Full Text Search is an extension to DuckDB that allows for search through strings, similar to SQLite's FTS5 extension.  
Note that the FTS index will not update automatically when input table changes. A workaround of this limitation can be recreating the index to refresh.

# API
The extension adds two `PRAGMA` statements to DuckDB: one to create, and one to drop an index. Additionally, a scalar macro `stem` is added, which is used internally by the extension.

### PRAGMA create_fts_index
```
create_fts_index(input_table, input_id, *input_values, stemmer='porter', stopwords='english',
                 ignore='(\\.|[^a-z])+', strip_accents=TRUE, lower=TRUE, overwrite=FALSE)
```
`PRAGMA` that creates a FTS index for the specified table.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|`input_table`|`VARCHAR`|Qualified name of specified table e.g. `'table_name'` or `'main.table_name'`|
|`input_id`|`VARCHAR`|Column name of document identifier e.g. `'document_identifier'`|
|`\*input_values`|`VARCHAR`|Column names of the text fields to be indexed (vararg) e.g. `'text_field_1'`, `'text_field_2'`, ..., `'text_field_N'`, or `'\*'` for all columns in input_table of type `VARCHAR`|
|`stemmer`|`VARCHAR`|The type of stemmer to be used. One of `'arabic'`, `'basque'`, `'catalan'`, `'danish'`, `'dutch'`, `'english'`, `'finnish'`, `'french'`, `'german'`, `'greek'`, `'hindi'`, `'hungarian'`, `'indonesian'`, `'irish'`, `'italian'`, `'lithuanian'`, `'nepali'`, `'norwegian'`, `'porter'`, `'portuguese'`, `'romanian'`, `'russian'`, `'serbian'`, `'spanish'`, `'swedish'`, `'tamil'`, `'turkish'`, or `'none'` if no stemming is to be used. Defaults to `'porter'`|
|`stopwords`|`VARCHAR`|Qualified name of table containing a single `VARCHAR` column containing the desired stopwords, or `'none'` if no stopwords are to be used. Defaults to `'english'` for a pre-defined list of 571 English stopwords|
|`ignore`|`VARCHAR`|Regular expression of patterns to be ignored. Defaults to `'(\\.|[^a-z])+'`, ignoring all escaped and non-alphabetic lowercase characters|
|`strip_accents`|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to remove accents (e.g. convert `á` to `a`). Defaults to `TRUE`|
|`lower`|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to convert all text to lowercase. Defaults to `TRUE`|
|`overwrite`|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to overwrite an existing index on a table. Defaults to `FALSE`|

This `PRAGMA` builds the index under a newly created schema. The schema will be named after the input table: if an index is created on table `'main.table_name'`, then the schema will be named `'fts_main_table_name'`.

### PRAGMA drop_fts_index
```
drop_fts_index(input_table)
```

Drops a FTS index for the specified table.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|input_table|`VARCHAR`|Qualified name of input table e.g. `'table_name'` or `'main.table_name'`|

### match_bm25
```
match_bm25(input_id, query_string, fields := NULL, k := 1.2, b:= 0.75, conjunctive := 0)
```
When an index is built, this retrieval macro is created that can be used to search the index.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|input_id|`VARCHAR`|Column name of document identifier e.g. `'document_identifier'`|
|query_string|`VARCHAR`|The string to search the index for|
|fields|`VARCHAR`|Comma-separarated list of fields to search in e.g. `'text_field_2,text_field_N'`. Defaults to `NULL` to search all indexed fields|
|k|`DOUBLE`|Parameter _k<sub>1</sub>_ in the Okapi BM25 retrieval model. Defaults to `1.2`|
|b|`DOUBLE`|Parameter _b_ in the Okapi BM25 retrieval model. Defaults to `0.75`|
|conjunctive|`BOOLEAN`|Whether to make the query conjunctive i.e. all terms in the query string must be present in order for a document to be retrieved|

### stem
```
stem(input_string, stemmer)
```
Reduces words to their base. Used internally by the extension.

| Name | Type | Description |
|:--|:--|:--|
|input_string|`VARCHAR`|The column or constant to be stemmed|
|stemmer|`VARCHAR`|The type of stemmer to be used. One of `'arabic'`, `'basque'`, `'catalan'`, `'danish'`, `'dutch'`, `'english'`, `'finnish'`, `'french'`, `'german'`, `'greek'`, `'hindi'`, `'hungarian'`, `'indonesian'`, `'irish'`, `'italian'`, `'lithuanian'`, `'nepali'`, `'norwegian'`, `'porter'`, `'portuguese'`, `'romanian'`, `'russian'`, `'serbian'`, `'spanish'`, `'swedish'`, `'tamil'`, `'turkish'`, or `'none'` if no stemming is to be used.|


# Example Usage

```sql
-- create a table and fill it with text data
CREATE TABLE documents(document_identifier VARCHAR, text_content VARCHAR, author VARCHAR, doc_version INTEGER);
INSERT INTO documents
VALUES ('doc1', 'The mallard is a dabbling duck that breeds throughout the temperate.','Hannes Mühleisen', 3),
       ('doc2', 'The cat is a domestic species of small carnivorous mammal.', 'Laurens Kuiper', 2);
-- build the index (make both the 'text_content' and 'author' columns searchable)
PRAGMA create_fts_index('documents', 'document_identifier', 'text_content', 'author');
-- search the 'author' field index for documents that are written by Hannes - this retrieves 'doc1'
SELECT text_content, score
FROM (SELECT *, fts_main_documents.match_bm25(document_identifier, 'Muhleisen', fields := 'author') AS score
      FROM documents) sq
WHERE score IS NOT NULL
  AND doc_version > 2
ORDER BY score DESC;
-- search for documents about 'small cats' - this retrieves 'doc2'
SELECT text_content, score
FROM (SELECT *, fts_main_documents.match_bm25(document_identifier, 'small cats') AS score
      FROM documents) sq
WHERE score IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY score DESC;
```
