docs/extensions/httpfs.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: HTTPFS
selected: Documentation/HTTPFS
---
The __httpfs__ extension is a loadable extension implementing a file system that allows reading remote/writing remote
files. For pure HTTP(S), only file reading is supported. For object storage using the S3 API, the __httpfs__ extension
supports reading/writing/globbing files.

Some clients come prebundled with this extension, in which case it's not necessary to first install or even load the extension.  
Depending on the client you use, no action may be required, or you might have to `INSTALL httpfs` on first use and use `LOAD httpfs` at the start of every session.

# HTTP(S)

With the __httpfs__ extension, it is possible to directly query files over HTTP(S). This currently works for CSV and
Parquet files.

```sql
SELECT * FROM 'https://domain.tld/file.extension';
```

For CSV files, files will be downloaded entirely in most cases, due to the row-based nature of the format. For parquet
files, DuckDB can use a combination of the Parquet metadata and HTTP range requests to only download the parts of the
file that are actually required by the query. For example, the query:

```sql
SELECT column_a FROM 'https://domain.tld/file.parquet';
```

will only read the parquet metadata and the data for the `column_a` column. In some cases even, no actual data needs to
be read at all as they only require reading the metadata:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM 'https://domain.tld/file.parquet';
```

Scanning multiple files over HTTP(S) is also supported:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan(['https://domain.tld/file1.parquet', 'https://domain.tld/file2.parquet']);
```

# S3

The __httpfs__ extension supports reading/writing/globbing files on object storage servers using the S3 API.

## Requirements

The __httpfs__ filesystem is tested with [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [Minio](https://min.io/), [Google cloud](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/interoperability), and [lakeFS](https://docs.lakefs.io/integrations/duckdb.html). Other services that implement the S3 API
should also work, but not all features may be supported. Below is a list of which parts of the S3 API are required for
each __httpfs__ feature.

| Feature | Required S3 API features |
|:---|:---|
| Public file reads | HTTP Range requests |
| Private file reads | Secret key or session token authentication |
| File glob | [ListObjectV2](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_ListObjectsV2.html)|
| File writes | [Multipart upload](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/mpuoverview.html)|

## Configuration

To be able to read or write from S3, the correct region should be set:

```sql
SET s3_region='us-east-1';
```

Optionally, the endpoint can be configured in case a non-AWS object storage server is used:

```sql
SET s3_endpoint='<domain>.<tld>:<port>';
```

If the endpoint is not SSL-enabled then run: 

```sql
SET s3_use_ssl=false;
```

Switching between path-style and vhost-style urls (see [AWS docs]()) is possible using:

```sql
SET s3_url_style='path';
```

However, note that this may also require updating the endpoint. For example for AWS S3 it is required to change the
endpoint to `s3.<region>.amazonaws.com`.

After configuring the correct endpoint and region, public files can be read. To also read private files, authentication
credentials can be added:

```sql
SET s3_access_key_id='<AWS access key id>';
SET s3_secret_access_key='<AWS secret access key>';
```

Alternatively, session tokens are also supported and can be used instead:

```sql
SET s3_session_token='<AWS session token>';
```

## Reading

Reading files from S3 is now as simple as:

```sql
SELECT * FROM 's3://bucket/file.extension';
```

Multiple files are also possible, for example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan(['s3://bucket/file1.parquet', 's3://bucket/file2.parquet']);
```

### Glob

File globbing is implemented using the ListObjectV2 API call and allows to use filesystem-like glob patterns to match
multiple files, for example:

```sql
SELECT * from parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*.parquet')
```

This query matches all files in the root of the bucket with the parquet extension.

Several features for matching are supported, such as `*` to match any number of any character, `?` for any single
character or `[0-9]` for a single character in a range of characters:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/folder*/100?/t[0-9].parquet')
```

A useful feature when using globs is the `filename` option which adds a column with the file that a row originated from:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*.parquet', FILENAME = 1);
```

could for example result in:

| column_a | column_b | filename
|:---|:---|:---|
| 1 | examplevalue1 | s3://bucket/file1.parquet
| 2 | examplevalue1 | s3://bucket/file2.parquet

#### Hive partitioning

DuckDB also offers support for the Hive partitioning scheme. In the Hive partitioning scheme, data is partitioned in
separate files. The columns by which the data is partitioned, are not actually in the files, but are encoded in the file
path. So for example let us consider three parquet files Hive paritioned by year:

```
s3://bucket/year=2012/file.parquet
s3://bucket/year=2013/file.parquet
s3://bucket/year=2014/file.parquet
```

If scanning these files with the HIVE_PARTITIONING option enabled:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*/file.parquet', HIVE_PARTITIONING = 1);
```

could result in:

| column_a | column_b | year
|:---|:---|:---|
| 1 | examplevalue1 | 2012
| 2 | examplevalue2 | 2013
| 3 | examplevalue3 | 2014

Note that the year column does not actually exist in the parquet files, it is parsed from the filenames. Within DuckDB
however, these columns behave just like regular columns. For example, filters can be applied on Hive partition
columns:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*/file.parquet', HIVE_PARTITIONING = 1) where year=2013;
```

## Writing

Writing to S3 uses the multipart upload API. This allows DuckDB to robustly upload files at high speed. Writing to S3
works for both CSV and Parquet:

```sql
COPY table_name TO 's3://bucket/file.extension';
```

Partioned copy to S3 also works:

```sql
COPY table TO 's3://my-bucket/partitioned' (FORMAT PARQUET, PARTITION_BY (part_col_a, part_col_b));
```

An automatic check is performed for existing files/directories, which is currently quite conservative (and on S3 will add a bit of latency). To disable this check and force writing, an `ALLOW_OVERWRITE` flag is added:

```sql
COPY table TO 's3://my-bucket/partitioned' (FORMAT PARQUET, PARTITION_BY (part_col_a, part_col_b), ALLOW_OVERWRITE TRUE);
```

The naming scheme of the written files looks like this:

```text
s3://my-bucket/partitioned/part_col_a=<val>/part_col_b=<val>/data_<thread_number>.parquet
```

### Configuration

Some additional configuration options exist for the S3 upload, though the default values should suffice for most use cases.

| setting | description |  
|:---|:---|
| s3_uploader_max_parts_per_file | used for part size calculation, see [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/qfacts.html)
| s3_uploader_max_filesize | used for part size calculation, see [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/qfacts.html)
| s3_uploader_thread_limit | maximum number of uploader threads

Commit message:

Update S3 config to include query params

docs/extensions/httpfs.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: HTTPFS
selected: Documentation/HTTPFS
---
The __httpfs__ extension is a loadable extension implementing a file system that allows reading remote/writing remote
files. For pure HTTP(S), only file reading is supported. For object storage using the S3 API, the __httpfs__ extension
supports reading/writing/globbing files.

Some clients come prebundled with this extension, in which case it's not necessary to first install or even load the extension.  
Depending on the client you use, no action may be required, or you might have to `INSTALL httpfs` on first use and use `LOAD httpfs` at the start of every session.

# HTTP(S)

With the __httpfs__ extension, it is possible to directly query files over HTTP(S). This currently works for CSV and
Parquet files.

```sql
SELECT * FROM 'https://domain.tld/file.extension';
```

For CSV files, files will be downloaded entirely in most cases, due to the row-based nature of the format. For parquet
files, DuckDB can use a combination of the Parquet metadata and HTTP range requests to only download the parts of the
file that are actually required by the query. For example, the query:

```sql
SELECT column_a FROM 'https://domain.tld/file.parquet';
```

will only read the parquet metadata and the data for the `column_a` column. In some cases even, no actual data needs to
be read at all as they only require reading the metadata:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM 'https://domain.tld/file.parquet';
```

Scanning multiple files over HTTP(S) is also supported:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan(['https://domain.tld/file1.parquet', 'https://domain.tld/file2.parquet']);
```

# S3

The __httpfs__ extension supports reading/writing/globbing files on object storage servers using the S3 API.

## Requirements

The __httpfs__ filesystem is tested with [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/), [Minio](https://min.io/), [Google cloud](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/interoperability), and [lakeFS](https://docs.lakefs.io/integrations/duckdb.html). Other services that implement the S3 API
should also work, but not all features may be supported. Below is a list of which parts of the S3 API are required for
each __httpfs__ feature.

| Feature | Required S3 API features |
|:---|:---|
| Public file reads | HTTP Range requests |
| Private file reads | Secret key or session token authentication |
| File glob | [ListObjectV2](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_ListObjectsV2.html)|
| File writes | [Multipart upload](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/mpuoverview.html)|

## Configuration

To be able to read or write from S3, the correct region should be set:

```sql
SET s3_region='us-east-1';
```

Optionally, the endpoint can be configured in case a non-AWS object storage server is used:

```sql
SET s3_endpoint='<domain>.<tld>:<port>';
```

If the endpoint is not SSL-enabled then run: 

```sql
SET s3_use_ssl=false;
```

Switching between [path-style](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-bucket-intro.html#path-style-url-ex)
and [vhost-style](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/access-bucket-intro.html#virtual-host-style-url-ex)
urls  is possible using:

```sql
SET s3_url_style='path';
```

However, note that this may also require updating the endpoint. For example for AWS S3 it is required to change the
endpoint to `s3.<region>.amazonaws.com`.

After configuring the correct endpoint and region, public files can be read. To also read private files, authentication
credentials can be added:

```sql
SET s3_access_key_id='<AWS access key id>';
SET s3_secret_access_key='<AWS secret access key>';
```

Alternatively, session tokens are also supported and can be used instead:

```sql
SET s3_session_token='<AWS session token>';
```

### Per-Request Configuration
Aside from the global S3 configuration described above, specific configuration values can be used on a per-request
basis. This allows for use of multiple sets of credentials, regions, etc. These are used by including them on the S3
URL as query parameters. All the individual configuration values listed above can be set as query parameters.

For instance,
```
s3://bucket/file.parquet?s3_access_key_id=accessKey&s3_secret_access_key=secretKey
```
or
```sql
SELECT *
FROM 's3://bucket/file.parquet?s3_region=region&s3_session_token=session_token' T1
INNER JOIN 's3://bucket/file.csv?s3_access_key_id=accessKey&s3_secret_access_key=secretKey' T2;
```

## Reading

Reading files from S3 is now as simple as:

```sql
SELECT * FROM 's3://bucket/file.extension';
```

Multiple files are also possible, for example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan(['s3://bucket/file1.parquet', 's3://bucket/file2.parquet']);
```

### Glob

File globbing is implemented using the ListObjectV2 API call and allows to use filesystem-like glob patterns to match
multiple files, for example:

```sql
SELECT * from parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*.parquet')
```

This query matches all files in the root of the bucket with the parquet extension.

Several features for matching are supported, such as `*` to match any number of any character, `?` for any single
character or `[0-9]` for a single character in a range of characters:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/folder*/100?/t[0-9].parquet')
```

A useful feature when using globs is the `filename` option which adds a column with the file that a row originated from:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*.parquet', FILENAME = 1);
```

could for example result in:

| column_a | column_b | filename
|:---|:---|:---|
| 1 | examplevalue1 | s3://bucket/file1.parquet
| 2 | examplevalue1 | s3://bucket/file2.parquet

#### Hive partitioning

DuckDB also offers support for the Hive partitioning scheme. In the Hive partitioning scheme, data is partitioned in
separate files. The columns by which the data is partitioned, are not actually in the files, but are encoded in the file
path. So for example let us consider three parquet files Hive paritioned by year:

```
s3://bucket/year=2012/file.parquet
s3://bucket/year=2013/file.parquet
s3://bucket/year=2014/file.parquet
```

If scanning these files with the HIVE_PARTITIONING option enabled:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*/file.parquet', HIVE_PARTITIONING = 1);
```

could result in:

| column_a | column_b | year
|:---|:---|:---|
| 1 | examplevalue1 | 2012
| 2 | examplevalue2 | 2013
| 3 | examplevalue3 | 2014

Note that the year column does not actually exist in the parquet files, it is parsed from the filenames. Within DuckDB
however, these columns behave just like regular columns. For example, filters can be applied on Hive partition
columns:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('s3://bucket/*/file.parquet', HIVE_PARTITIONING = 1) where year=2013;
```

## Writing

Writing to S3 uses the multipart upload API. This allows DuckDB to robustly upload files at high speed. Writing to S3
works for both CSV and Parquet:

```sql
COPY table_name TO 's3://bucket/file.extension';
```

Partioned copy to S3 also works:

```sql
COPY table TO 's3://my-bucket/partitioned' (FORMAT PARQUET, PARTITION_BY (part_col_a, part_col_b));
```

An automatic check is performed for existing files/directories, which is currently quite conservative (and on S3 will add a bit of latency). To disable this check and force writing, an `ALLOW_OVERWRITE` flag is added:

```sql
COPY table TO 's3://my-bucket/partitioned' (FORMAT PARQUET, PARTITION_BY (part_col_a, part_col_b), ALLOW_OVERWRITE TRUE);
```

The naming scheme of the written files looks like this:

```text
s3://my-bucket/partitioned/part_col_a=<val>/part_col_b=<val>/data_<thread_number>.parquet
```

### Configuration

Some additional configuration options exist for the S3 upload, though the default values should suffice for most use cases.

| setting | description |  
|:---|:---|
| s3_uploader_max_parts_per_file | used for part size calculation, see [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/qfacts.html)
| s3_uploader_max_filesize | used for part size calculation, see [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/qfacts.html)
| s3_uploader_thread_limit | maximum number of uploader threads
