docs/extensions/json.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: JSON
selected: Documentation/JSON
---
The __json__ extension is a loadable extension that implements SQL functions that are useful for reading values from existing JSON, and creating new JSON data.

## JSON Type
The JSON extension makes use of the **JSON** logical type.
The **JSON** logical type is interpreted as JSON, i.e., parsed, in JSON functions rather than interpreted as **VARCHAR**, i.e., a regular string.
All JSON creation functions return values of this type.

## JSON Functions
The following scalar JSON functions can be used to gain information about the stored JSON values.
With the exception of `json_valid(`*`json`*`)`, all JSON functions produce an error when invalid JSON is supplied.

We support two kinds of notations to describe locations within JSON: [JSON Pointer](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6901) and JSONPath.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `json(`*`json`*`)` | Parse and minify *`json`* |
| `json_valid(`*`json`*`)` | Return whether *`json`* is valid JSON |
| `json_array_length(`*`json `*`[, `*`path`*`])` | Return the number of elements in the JSON array *`json`*, or `0` if it is not a JSON array. If *`path`* is specified, return the number of elements in the JSON array at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be **LIST** of array lengths |
| `json_type(`*`json `*`[, `*`path`*`])` | Return the type of the supplied *`json`*, which is one of **OBJECT**, **ARRAY**, **BIGINT**, **UBIGINT**, **VARCHAR**, **BOOLEAN**, **NULL**. If *`path`* is specified, return the type of the element at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be **LIST** of types |
| `json_structure(`*`json`*`)` | Return the structure of *`json`*. Throws an error if the structure is inconsistent (incompatible types in an array) |

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  (' { "family": "anatidae", "species": [ "duck", "goose", "swan", null ] }');
SELECT json(j) FROM example;
-- {"family":"anatidae","species":["duck","goose","swan",null]}
SELECT json_valid(j) FROM example;
-- true
SELECT json_valid('{');
-- false
SELECT json_array_length('["duck","goose","swan",null]');
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, 'species') FROM example;
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, '/species') FROM example;
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, '$.species') FROM example;
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, ['$.species']) FROM example;
-- [4]
SELECT json_type(j) FROM example;
-- OBJECT
SELECT json_structure(j) FROM example;
-- {"family":"VARCHAR","species":["VARCHAR"]}
SELECT json_structure('["duck",{"family":"anatidae"}]');
-- Invalid Input Error: Inconsistent JSON structure
```

## JSON Extraction Functions
There are two extraction functions, which have their respective operators. The operators can only be used if the string is stored as the **JSON** logical type.
These functions supports the same two location notations as the previous functions.

| Function | Alias | Operator | Description |
|:---|:---|:---|
| `json_extract(`*`json`*`,`*`path`*`)` | `json_extract_path` | `->` | Extract **JSON** from *`json`* at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be a **LIST** of **JSON** |
| `json_extract_string(`*`json`*`,`*`path`*`)` | `json_extract_path_text` | `->>` | Extract **VARCHAR** from *`json`* at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be a **LIST** of **VARCHAR** |

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  (' { "family": "anatidae", "species": [ "duck", "goose", "swan", null ] }');
SELECT json_extract(j, '$.family') FROM example;
-- "anatidae"
SELECT j->'$.family' FROM example;
-- "anatidae"
SELECT j->'$.species[0]' FROM example;
-- "duck"
SELECT j->'$.species'->0 FROM example;
-- "duck"
SELECT j->'species'->>[0,1] FROM example;
-- ["duck", "goose"]
SELECT json_extract_string(j, '$.family') FROM example;
-- anatidae
SELECT j->>'$.family' FROM example;
-- anatidae
SELECT j->>'$.species[0]' FROM example;
-- duck
SELECT j->'species'->>0 FROM example;
-- duck
SELECT j->'species'->>[0,1] FROM example;
-- [duck, goose]
```

## JSON Creation Functions
The following functions are used to create JSON.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|:---|
| `to_json(`*`any`*`)` | Create **JSON** from a value of *`any`* type. Our **LIST** is converted to a JSON array, and our **STRUCT** and **MAP** are converted to a JSON object |
| `json_quote(`*`any`*`)` | Alias for `to_json` |
| `array_to_json(`*`list`*`)` | Alias for `to_json` that only accepts **LIST** |
| `row_to_json(`*`list`*`)` | Alias for `to_json` that only accepts **STRUCT** |
| `json_array([`*`any`*`, ...])` | Create a JSON array from *`any`* number of values |
| `json_object([`*`key`*`,`*`value`*`, ...])` | Create a JSON object from any number of *`key`*, *`value`* pairs |

Examples:
```sql
SELECT to_json('duck');
-- "duck"
SELECT to_json([1, 2, 3]);
-- [1,2,3]
SELECT to_json({duck : 42});
-- {"duck":42}
SELECT to_json(map(['duck'],[42]));
-- {"duck":42}
SELECT json_array(42, 'duck', NULL);
-- [42,"duck",null]
SELECT json_object('duck', 42);
-- {"duck":42}
```

## JSON Aggregate Functions
There are three JSON aggregate functions.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `json_group_array(`*`any`*`)` | Return a JSON array with all values of *`any`* in the aggregation |
| `json_group_object(`*`key`*`, `*`value`*`)` | Return a JSON object with all *`key`*, *`value`* pairs in the aggregation |
| `json_group_structure(`*`json`*`)` | Return the combined `json_structure` of all *`json`* in the aggregation |

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (k VARCHAR, v INTEGER);
INSERT INTO example VALUES ('duck', 42), ('goose', 7);
SELECT json_group_array(v) FROM example;
-- [42, 7]
SELECT json_group_object(k, v) FROM example;
-- {"duck":42,"goose":7}
DROP TABLE example;
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  ('{"family": "anatidae", "species": ["duck", "goose"], "coolness": 42.42}'),
  ('{"family": "canidae", "species": ["labrador", "bulldog"], "hair": true}');
SELECT json_group_structure(j) FROM example;
-- {"family":"VARCHAR","species":["VARCHAR"],"coolness":"DOUBLE","hair":"BOOLEAN"}
```

## Transforming JSON
In many cases, it is inefficient to extract values from JSON one-by-one.
Instead, we can "extract" all values at once, transforming JSON to the nested types **LIST** and **STRUCT**.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `json_transform(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Transform *`json`* according to the specified *`structure`* |
| `from_json(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Alias for `json_transform` |
| `json_transform_strict(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Same as `json_transform`, but throws an error when type casting fails |
| `from_json_strict(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Alias for `json_transform_strict` |

The *`structure`* argument is JSON of the same form as returned by `json_structure`.
The *`structure`* argument can be modified to transform the JSON into the desired structure and types.
It is possible to extract fewer key/value pairs than are present in the JSON, and it is also possible to extract more: missing keys become **NULL**.

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  ('{"family": "anatidae", "species": ["duck", "goose"], "coolness": 42.42}'),
  ('{"family": "canidae", "species": ["labrador", "bulldog"], "hair": true}');
SELECT json_transform(j, '{"family":"VARCHAR","coolness":"DOUBLE"}') FROM example;
-- {'family': anatidae, 'coolness': 42.420000}
-- {'family': canidae, 'coolness': NULL}
SELECT json_transform(j, '{"family":"TINYINT","coolness":"DECIMAL(4,2)"}') FROM example;
-- {'family': NULL, 'coolness': 42.42}
-- {'family': NULL, 'coolness': NULL}
SELECT json_transform_strict(j, '{"family":"TINYINT","coolness":"DOUBLE"}') FROM example;
-- Invalid Input Error: Failed to cast value: "anatidae"
```

Commit message:

feat: document read_json_objects

docs/extensions/json.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: JSON
selected: Documentation/JSON
---
The __json__ extension is a loadable extension that implements SQL functions that are useful for reading values from existing JSON, and creating new JSON data.

## JSON Type
The JSON extension makes use of the **JSON** logical type.
The **JSON** logical type is interpreted as JSON, i.e., parsed, in JSON functions rather than interpreted as **VARCHAR**, i.e., a regular string.
All JSON creation functions return values of this type.

## JSON Functions
The following scalar JSON functions can be used to gain information about the stored JSON values.
With the exception of `json_valid(`*`json`*`)`, all JSON functions produce an error when invalid JSON is supplied.

We support two kinds of notations to describe locations within JSON: [JSON Pointer](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6901) and JSONPath.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `json(`*`json`*`)` | Parse and minify *`json`* |
| `json_valid(`*`json`*`)` | Return whether *`json`* is valid JSON |
| `json_array_length(`*`json `*`[, `*`path`*`])` | Return the number of elements in the JSON array *`json`*, or `0` if it is not a JSON array. If *`path`* is specified, return the number of elements in the JSON array at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be **LIST** of array lengths |
| `json_type(`*`json `*`[, `*`path`*`])` | Return the type of the supplied *`json`*, which is one of **OBJECT**, **ARRAY**, **BIGINT**, **UBIGINT**, **VARCHAR**, **BOOLEAN**, **NULL**. If *`path`* is specified, return the type of the element at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be **LIST** of types |
| `json_structure(`*`json`*`)` | Return the structure of *`json`*. Throws an error if the structure is inconsistent (incompatible types in an array) |

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  (' { "family": "anatidae", "species": [ "duck", "goose", "swan", null ] }');
SELECT json(j) FROM example;
-- {"family":"anatidae","species":["duck","goose","swan",null]}
SELECT json_valid(j) FROM example;
-- true
SELECT json_valid('{');
-- false
SELECT json_array_length('["duck","goose","swan",null]');
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, 'species') FROM example;
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, '/species') FROM example;
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, '$.species') FROM example;
-- 4
SELECT json_array_length(j, ['$.species']) FROM example;
-- [4]
SELECT json_type(j) FROM example;
-- OBJECT
SELECT json_structure(j) FROM example;
-- {"family":"VARCHAR","species":["VARCHAR"]}
SELECT json_structure('["duck",{"family":"anatidae"}]');
-- Invalid Input Error: Inconsistent JSON structure
```

## JSON Extraction Functions
There are two extraction functions, which have their respective operators. The operators can only be used if the string is stored as the **JSON** logical type.
These functions supports the same two location notations as the previous functions.

| Function | Alias | Operator | Description |
|:---|:---|:---|
| `json_extract(`*`json`*`,`*`path`*`)` | `json_extract_path` | `->` | Extract **JSON** from *`json`* at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be a **LIST** of **JSON** |
| `json_extract_string(`*`json`*`,`*`path`*`)` | `json_extract_path_text` | `->>` | Extract **VARCHAR** from *`json`* at the given *`path`*. If *`path`* is a **LIST**, the result will be a **LIST** of **VARCHAR** |

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  (' { "family": "anatidae", "species": [ "duck", "goose", "swan", null ] }');
SELECT json_extract(j, '$.family') FROM example;
-- "anatidae"
SELECT j->'$.family' FROM example;
-- "anatidae"
SELECT j->'$.species[0]' FROM example;
-- "duck"
SELECT j->'$.species'->0 FROM example;
-- "duck"
SELECT j->'species'->>[0,1] FROM example;
-- ["duck", "goose"]
SELECT json_extract_string(j, '$.family') FROM example;
-- anatidae
SELECT j->>'$.family' FROM example;
-- anatidae
SELECT j->>'$.species[0]' FROM example;
-- duck
SELECT j->'species'->>0 FROM example;
-- duck
SELECT j->'species'->>[0,1] FROM example;
-- [duck, goose]
```

## JSON Creation Functions
The following functions are used to create JSON.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `to_json(`*`any`*`)` | Create **JSON** from a value of *`any`* type. Our **LIST** is converted to a JSON array, and our **STRUCT** and **MAP** are converted to a JSON object |
| `json_quote(`*`any`*`)` | Alias for `to_json` |
| `array_to_json(`*`list`*`)` | Alias for `to_json` that only accepts **LIST** |
| `row_to_json(`*`list`*`)` | Alias for `to_json` that only accepts **STRUCT** |
| `json_array([`*`any`*`, ...])` | Create a JSON array from *`any`* number of values |
| `json_object([`*`key`*`,`*`value`*`, ...])` | Create a JSON object from any number of *`key`*, *`value`* pairs |
| `read_json_objects(`*`filename`*`)`   | Read 1 or more json objects from a file |
| `read_ndjson_objects(`*`filename`*`)` | Alias for `read_ndjson_objects`         |

Examples:
```sql
SELECT to_json('duck');
-- "duck"
SELECT to_json([1, 2, 3]);
-- [1,2,3]
SELECT to_json({duck : 42});
-- {"duck":42}
SELECT to_json(map(['duck'],[42]));
-- {"duck":42}
SELECT json_array(42, 'duck', NULL);
-- [42,"duck",null]
SELECT json_object('duck', 42);
-- {"duck":42}
```

## JSON Aggregate Functions
There are three JSON aggregate functions.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `json_group_array(`*`any`*`)` | Return a JSON array with all values of *`any`* in the aggregation |
| `json_group_object(`*`key`*`, `*`value`*`)` | Return a JSON object with all *`key`*, *`value`* pairs in the aggregation |
| `json_group_structure(`*`json`*`)` | Return the combined `json_structure` of all *`json`* in the aggregation |

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (k VARCHAR, v INTEGER);
INSERT INTO example VALUES ('duck', 42), ('goose', 7);
SELECT json_group_array(v) FROM example;
-- [42, 7]
SELECT json_group_object(k, v) FROM example;
-- {"duck":42,"goose":7}
DROP TABLE example;
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  ('{"family": "anatidae", "species": ["duck", "goose"], "coolness": 42.42}'),
  ('{"family": "canidae", "species": ["labrador", "bulldog"], "hair": true}');
SELECT json_group_structure(j) FROM example;
-- {"family":"VARCHAR","species":["VARCHAR"],"coolness":"DOUBLE","hair":"BOOLEAN"}
```

## Transforming JSON
In many cases, it is inefficient to extract values from JSON one-by-one.
Instead, we can "extract" all values at once, transforming JSON to the nested types **LIST** and **STRUCT**.

| Function | Description |
|:---|:---|
| `json_transform(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Transform *`json`* according to the specified *`structure`* |
| `from_json(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Alias for `json_transform` |
| `json_transform_strict(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Same as `json_transform`, but throws an error when type casting fails |
| `from_json_strict(`*`json`*`, `*`structure`*`)` | Alias for `json_transform_strict` |

The *`structure`* argument is JSON of the same form as returned by `json_structure`.
The *`structure`* argument can be modified to transform the JSON into the desired structure and types.
It is possible to extract fewer key/value pairs than are present in the JSON, and it is also possible to extract more: missing keys become **NULL**.

Examples:
```sql
CREATE TABLE example (j JSON);
INSERT INTO example VALUES
  ('{"family": "anatidae", "species": ["duck", "goose"], "coolness": 42.42}'),
  ('{"family": "canidae", "species": ["labrador", "bulldog"], "hair": true}');
SELECT json_transform(j, '{"family":"VARCHAR","coolness":"DOUBLE"}') FROM example;
-- {'family': anatidae, 'coolness': 42.420000}
-- {'family': canidae, 'coolness': NULL}
SELECT json_transform(j, '{"family":"TINYINT","coolness":"DECIMAL(4,2)"}') FROM example;
-- {'family': NULL, 'coolness': 42.42}
-- {'family': NULL, 'coolness': NULL}
SELECT json_transform_strict(j, '{"family":"TINYINT","coolness":"DOUBLE"}') FROM example;
-- Invalid Input Error: Failed to cast value: "anatidae"
```
