docs/data/parquet.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Parquet
---
Parquet files are compressed columnar files that are efficient to load and process. DuckDB provides support for both reading and writing Parquet files in an efficient manner, as well as support for pushing filters and projections into the Parquet file scans.

### Examples
```sql
-- read a single parquet file
SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- figure out which columns/types are in a parquet file
DESCRIBE SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- create a table from a parquet file
CREATE TABLE test AS SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- if the file does not end in ".parquet", use the read_parquet function
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parq');
-- use list parameter to read 3 parquet files and treat them as a single table
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['file1.parquet', 'file2.parquet', 'file3.parquet']);
-- read all files that match the glob pattern
SELECT * FROM 'test/*.parquet';
-- read all files that match the glob pattern, and include a "filename" column that specifies which file each row came from
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test/*.parquet', filename=true);
-- use a list of globs to read all parquet files from 2 specific folders
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['folder1/*.parquet','folder2/*.parquet']);
-- query the metadata of a parquet file
SELECT * FROM parquet_metadata('test.parquet');
-- query the schema of a parquet file
SELECT * FROM parquet_schema('test.parquet');
-- write the results of a query to a parquet file
COPY (SELECT * FROM tbl) TO 'result-snappy.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet');
-- write the results from a query to a parquet file with specific compression and row_group_size
COPY (FROM generate_series(100000)) TO 'test.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet', COMPRESSION 'ZSTD', ROW_GROUP_SIZE 100000);
-- export the table contents of the entire database as parquet
EXPORT DATABASE 'target_directory' (FORMAT PARQUET);
```

### Single-File Reads
DuckDB includes an efficient Parquet reader in the form of the `read_parquet` function.

```sql
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
```

If your file ends in `.parquet`, the read_parquet syntax is optional. The system will automatically infer that you are reading a Parquet file.

```sql
SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
```

Unlike CSV files, parquet files are structured and as such are unambiguous to read. No parameters need to be passed to this function. The `read_parquet` function will figure out the column names and column types present in the file and emit them.

### Multi-File Reads and Globs
DuckDB can also read a series of Parquet files and treat them as if they were a single table. Note that this only works if the Parquet files have the same schema. You can specify which Parquet files you want to read using a list parameter, glob pattern matching syntax, or a combination of both.

#### List Parameter
The read_parquet function can accept a list of filenames as the input parameter. See the [nested types documentation](../sql/data_types/overview) for more details on lists.
```sql
-- read 3 parquet files and treat them as a single table
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['file1.parquet', 'file2.parquet', 'file3.parquet']);
```

#### Glob Syntax
Any file name input to the read_parquet function can either be an exact filename, or use a glob syntax to read multple files that match a pattern.

|  Wildcard  |                        Description                        |
|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| `*`        | matches any number of any characters (including none)     |
| `?`        | matches any single character                              |
| `[abc]`    | matches one character given in the bracket                |
| `[a-z]`    | matches one character from the range given in the bracket |

Here is an example that reads all the files that end with `.parquet` located in the `test` folder:

```sql
-- read all files that match the glob pattern
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test/*.parquet');
```

#### List of Globs
The glob syntax and the list input parameter can be combined to scan files that meet one of multiple patterns.

```sql
-- Read all parquet files from 2 specific folders
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['folder1/*.parquet','folder2/*.parquet']);
```

#### Filenames
The `filename` parameter can be passed into the `read_parquet` function to include an extra `filename` column that specifies for each row from which file it was read. For example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('data/parquet-testing/glob/*', filename=true) ORDER BY i;
```

The following is a table of the columns returned by this query.

| i | j |               filename               |
|---|---|--------------------------------------|
| 1 | a | data/parquet-testing/glob/t1.parquet |
| 2 | b | data/parquet-testing/glob/t2.parquet |


#### Row Numbers
Passing the `file_row_number` parameter to the `read_parquet` function allows you to add a `file_row_number` column for each row, specifying from which row of each file it was read.
```sql
SELECT first_name, last_name, email, file_row_number FROM parquet_scan('userdata1.parquet', file_row_number=true) limit 5;
```

The following is a table of the columns returned by this query.

| first_name | last_name |          email           | file_row_number |
|------------|-----------|--------------------------|-----------------|
| Amanda     | Jordan    | ajordan0@com.com         | 0               |
| Albert     | Freeman   | afreeman1@is.gd          | 1               |
| Evelyn     | Morgan    | emorgan2@altervista.org  | 2               |
| Denise     | Riley     | driley3@gmpg.org         | 3               |
| Carlos     | Burns     | cburns4@miitbeian.gov.cn | 4               |

### Partial Reading
DuckDB supports projection pushdown into the Parquet file itself. That is to say, when querying a Parquet file, only the columns required for the query are read. This allows you to read only the part of the Parquet file that you are interested in. This will be done automatically by the system.

DuckDB also supports filter pushdown into the Parquet reader. When you apply a filter to a column that is scanned from a Parquet file, the filter will be pushed down into the scan, and can even be used to skip parts of the file using the built-in zonemaps. Note that this will depend on whether or not your Parquet file contains zonemaps.

Filter and projection pushdown provide significant performance benefits. See [our blog post on this](https://duckdb.org/2021/06/25/querying-parquet.html) for more information.

### Inserts and Views
You can also insert the data into a table or create a table from the parquet file directly. This will load the data from the parquet file and insert it into the database.

```sql
-- insert the data from the parquet file in the table
INSERT INTO people SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
-- create a table directly from a parquet file
CREATE TABLE people AS SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
```

If you wish to keep the data stored inside the parquet file, but want to query the parquet file directly, you can create a view over the `read_parquet` function. You can then query the parquet file as if it were a built-in table.

```sql
-- create a view over the parquet file
CREATE VIEW people AS SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
-- query the parquet file
SELECT * FROM people;
```

### Parquet Metadata
The `parquet_metadata` function can be used to query the metadata contained within a Parquet file, which reveals various internal details of the Parquet file such as the statistics of the different columns. This can be useful for figuring out what kind of skipping is possible in Parquet files, or even to obtain a quick overview of what the different columns contain.

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_metadata('test.parquet');
```

Below is a table of the columns returned by `parquet_metadata`.

|          Field          |  Type   |
|-------------------------|---------|
| file_name               | VARCHAR |
| row_group_id            | BIGINT  |
| row_group_num_rows      | BIGINT  |
| row_group_num_columns   | BIGINT  |
| row_group_bytes         | BIGINT  |
| column_id               | BIGINT  |
| file_offset             | BIGINT  |
| num_values              | BIGINT  |
| path_in_schema          | VARCHAR |
| type                    | VARCHAR |
| stats_min               | VARCHAR |
| stats_max               | VARCHAR |
| stats_null_count        | BIGINT  |
| stats_distinct_count    | BIGINT  |
| stats_min_value         | VARCHAR |
| stats_max_value         | VARCHAR |
| compression             | VARCHAR |
| encodings               | VARCHAR |
| index_page_offset       | BIGINT  |
| dictionary_page_offset  | BIGINT  |
| data_page_offset        | BIGINT  |
| total_compressed_size   | BIGINT  |
| total_uncompressed_size | BIGINT  |


### Parquet Schema
The `parquet_schema` function can be used to query the internal schema contained within a Parquet file. Note that this is the schema as it is contained within the metadata of the Parquet file. If you want to figure out the column names and types contained within a Parquet file it is easier to use `DESCRIBE`.

```sql
-- fetch the column names and column types
DESCRIBE SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- fetch the internal schema of a parquet file
SELECT * FROM parquet_schema('test.parquet');
```

Below is a table of the columns returned by `parquet_schema`.

|      Field      |  Type   |
|-----------------|---------|
| file_name       | VARCHAR |
| name            | VARCHAR |
| type            | VARCHAR |
| type_length     | VARCHAR |
| repetition_type | VARCHAR |
| num_children    | BIGINT  |
| converted_type  | VARCHAR |
| scale           | BIGINT  |
| precision       | BIGINT  |
| field_id        | BIGINT  |
| logical_type    | VARCHAR |

### Writing to Parquet Files
DuckDB also has support for writing to Parquet files using the `COPY` statement syntax. See the [Copy Statement page](/docs/sql/statements/copy) for details, including all possible parameters for the copy statement.

Parameter values can be passed in with or without wrapping in single quotes.

You can specify which compression format should be used using the `CODEC` parameter (options: `UNCOMPRESSED`, `SNAPPY` (default), `ZSTD`, `GZIP`). `COMPRESSION` is an alias for `CODEC` and can be used instead with the same options. 

The `ROW_GROUP_SIZE` parameter specifies the minimum number of rows in a parquet row group, with a minimum value equal to DuckDB's vector size (currently 2048, but adjustable when compiling DuckDB). A parquet row group is a partition of rows, consisting of a column chunk for each column in the dataset. Compression algorithms are only applied per row group, so the larger the row group size, the more opportunities to compress the data. DuckDB can read parquet row groups in parallel even within the same file and uses predicate pushdown to only scan the row groups whose metadata ranges match the `WHERE` clause of the query. However there is some overhead associated with reading the metadata in each group. A good approach would be to ensure that within each file, the total number of row groups is at least as large as the number of CPU threads used to query that file. More row groups beyond the thread count would improve the speed of highly selective queries, but slow down queries that must scan the whole file like aggregations.

```sql
-- write a query to a snappy compressed parquet file
COPY (SELECT * FROM tbl) TO 'result-snappy.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet')
-- write "tbl" to a zstd compressed parquet file
COPY tbl TO 'result-zstd.parquet' (FORMAT 'PARQUET', CODEC 'ZSTD')
-- write a csv file to an uncompressed parquet file
COPY 'test.csv' TO 'result-uncompressed.parquet' (FORMAT 'PARQUET', CODEC 'UNCOMPRESSED')
-- write a query to a parquet file with ZSTD compression (same as CODEC) and row_group_size
COPY (FROM generate_series(100000)) TO 'row-groups-zstd.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET, COMPRESSION ZSTD, ROW_GROUP_SIZE 100000);
```

DuckDB's `EXPORT` command can be used to export an entire database to a series of Parquet files. See the [Export statement documentation](../sql/statements/export) for more details.
```sql
-- export the table contents of the entire database as parquet
EXPORT DATABASE 'target_directory' (FORMAT PARQUET);
```

### Installing and loading `parquet` extension

The support for `parquet` files is enabled via extension. The extension is bundled with almost all clients. However, if your client does not bundle the Parquet extension, the extension must be installed and loaded separately.

```sql
-- run once
INSTALL parquet;
-- run before usage
LOAD parquet;
```

Commit message:

Add Union by name to csv optiosn and parquet page

docs/data/parquet.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Parquet
---
Parquet files are compressed columnar files that are efficient to load and process. DuckDB provides support for both reading and writing Parquet files in an efficient manner, as well as support for pushing filters and projections into the Parquet file scans.

### Examples
```sql
-- read a single parquet file
SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- figure out which columns/types are in a parquet file
DESCRIBE SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- create a table from a parquet file
CREATE TABLE test AS SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- if the file does not end in ".parquet", use the read_parquet function
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parq');
-- use list parameter to read 3 parquet files and treat them as a single table
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['file1.parquet', 'file2.parquet', 'file3.parquet']);
-- read all files that match the glob pattern
SELECT * FROM 'test/*.parquet';
-- read all files that match the glob pattern, and include a "filename" column that specifies which file each row came from
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test/*.parquet', filename=true);
-- read all files that match the glob pattern, but match by column name rather than position
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test/*.parquet', UNION_BY_NAME=TRUE);
-- use a list of globs to read all parquet files from 2 specific folders
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['folder1/*.parquet','folder2/*.parquet']);
-- query the metadata of a parquet file
SELECT * FROM parquet_metadata('test.parquet');
-- query the schema of a parquet file
SELECT * FROM parquet_schema('test.parquet');
-- write the results of a query to a parquet file
COPY (SELECT * FROM tbl) TO 'result-snappy.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet');
-- write the results from a query to a parquet file with specific compression and row_group_size
COPY (FROM generate_series(100000)) TO 'test.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet', COMPRESSION 'ZSTD', ROW_GROUP_SIZE 100000);
-- export the table contents of the entire database as parquet
EXPORT DATABASE 'target_directory' (FORMAT PARQUET);
```

### Single-File Reads
DuckDB includes an efficient Parquet reader in the form of the `read_parquet` function.

```sql
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
```

If your file ends in `.parquet`, the read_parquet syntax is optional. The system will automatically infer that you are reading a Parquet file.

```sql
SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
```

Unlike CSV files, parquet files are structured and as such are unambiguous to read. No parameters need to be passed to this function. The `read_parquet` function will figure out the column names and column types present in the file and emit them.

### Multi-File Reads and Globs
DuckDB can also read a series of Parquet files and treat them as if they were a single table. Note that this only works if the Parquet files have the same schema. You can specify which Parquet files you want to read using a list parameter, glob pattern matching syntax, or a combination of both.

#### List Parameter
The read_parquet function can accept a list of filenames as the input parameter. See the [nested types documentation](../sql/data_types/overview) for more details on lists.
```sql
-- read 3 parquet files and treat them as a single table
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['file1.parquet', 'file2.parquet', 'file3.parquet']);
```

#### Glob Syntax
Any file name input to the read_parquet function can either be an exact filename, or use a glob syntax to read multple files that match a pattern.

|  Wildcard  |                        Description                        |
|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| `*`        | matches any number of any characters (including none)     |
| `?`        | matches any single character                              |
| `[abc]`    | matches one character given in the bracket                |
| `[a-z]`    | matches one character from the range given in the bracket |

Here is an example that reads all the files that end with `.parquet` located in the `test` folder:

```sql
-- read all files that match the glob pattern
SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test/*.parquet');
```

#### List of Globs
The glob syntax and the list input parameter can be combined to scan files that meet one of multiple patterns.

```sql
-- Read all parquet files from 2 specific folders
SELECT * FROM read_parquet(['folder1/*.parquet','folder2/*.parquet']);
```

#### Union by Name
When combining multiple parquet files, by default DuckDB uses a `UNION ALL` operator. 
This combines columns based on their position (their order from left to right in an output table). 
However, this does not handle the situation where multiple files have different schemas. 
The `UNION_BY_NAME` option for read_parquet allows for the parquet reader to combine multiple files by matching on column names rather than position. 
If a file has a different column, a new column is created in the output, and `NULL`s are populated for files without that column.
See the [Set Operations page](/docs/sql/query_syntax/setops) for more details.

```sql
-- Create 2 example files with different schemas
COPY (SELECT 1 as column1) to 'test.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET);
COPY (SELECT 2 as column2) to 'test2.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET);

-- Match by column name. Include the filename as well to illustrate what is happening
SELECT 
    filename,
    column1,
    column2 
FROM read_parquet('test*.parquet', UNION_BY_NAME=TRUE, FILENAME=TRUE);
```

|   filename    | column1 | column2 |
|---------------|---------|---------|
| test.parquet  | 1       | NULL    |
| test2.parquet | NULL    | 2       |

#### Filenames
The `filename` parameter can be passed into the `read_parquet` function to include an extra `filename` column that specifies for each row from which file it was read. For example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('data/parquet-testing/glob/*', filename=true) ORDER BY i;
```

The following is a table of the columns returned by this query.

| i | j |               filename               |
|---|---|--------------------------------------|
| 1 | a | data/parquet-testing/glob/t1.parquet |
| 2 | b | data/parquet-testing/glob/t2.parquet |


#### Row Numbers
Passing the `file_row_number` parameter to the `read_parquet` function allows you to add a `file_row_number` column for each row, specifying from which row of each file it was read.
```sql
SELECT first_name, last_name, email, file_row_number FROM parquet_scan('userdata1.parquet', file_row_number=true) limit 5;
```

The following is a table of the columns returned by this query.

| first_name | last_name |          email           | file_row_number |
|------------|-----------|--------------------------|-----------------|
| Amanda     | Jordan    | ajordan0@com.com         | 0               |
| Albert     | Freeman   | afreeman1@is.gd          | 1               |
| Evelyn     | Morgan    | emorgan2@altervista.org  | 2               |
| Denise     | Riley     | driley3@gmpg.org         | 3               |
| Carlos     | Burns     | cburns4@miitbeian.gov.cn | 4               |

### Partial Reading
DuckDB supports projection pushdown into the Parquet file itself. That is to say, when querying a Parquet file, only the columns required for the query are read. This allows you to read only the part of the Parquet file that you are interested in. This will be done automatically by the system.

DuckDB also supports filter pushdown into the Parquet reader. When you apply a filter to a column that is scanned from a Parquet file, the filter will be pushed down into the scan, and can even be used to skip parts of the file using the built-in zonemaps. Note that this will depend on whether or not your Parquet file contains zonemaps.

Filter and projection pushdown provide significant performance benefits. See [our blog post on this](https://duckdb.org/2021/06/25/querying-parquet.html) for more information.

### Inserts and Views
You can also insert the data into a table or create a table from the parquet file directly. This will load the data from the parquet file and insert it into the database.

```sql
-- insert the data from the parquet file in the table
INSERT INTO people SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
-- create a table directly from a parquet file
CREATE TABLE people AS SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
```

If you wish to keep the data stored inside the parquet file, but want to query the parquet file directly, you can create a view over the `read_parquet` function. You can then query the parquet file as if it were a built-in table.

```sql
-- create a view over the parquet file
CREATE VIEW people AS SELECT * FROM read_parquet('test.parquet');
-- query the parquet file
SELECT * FROM people;
```

### Parquet Metadata
The `parquet_metadata` function can be used to query the metadata contained within a Parquet file, which reveals various internal details of the Parquet file such as the statistics of the different columns. This can be useful for figuring out what kind of skipping is possible in Parquet files, or even to obtain a quick overview of what the different columns contain.

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_metadata('test.parquet');
```

Below is a table of the columns returned by `parquet_metadata`.

|          Field          |  Type   |
|-------------------------|---------|
| file_name               | VARCHAR |
| row_group_id            | BIGINT  |
| row_group_num_rows      | BIGINT  |
| row_group_num_columns   | BIGINT  |
| row_group_bytes         | BIGINT  |
| column_id               | BIGINT  |
| file_offset             | BIGINT  |
| num_values              | BIGINT  |
| path_in_schema          | VARCHAR |
| type                    | VARCHAR |
| stats_min               | VARCHAR |
| stats_max               | VARCHAR |
| stats_null_count        | BIGINT  |
| stats_distinct_count    | BIGINT  |
| stats_min_value         | VARCHAR |
| stats_max_value         | VARCHAR |
| compression             | VARCHAR |
| encodings               | VARCHAR |
| index_page_offset       | BIGINT  |
| dictionary_page_offset  | BIGINT  |
| data_page_offset        | BIGINT  |
| total_compressed_size   | BIGINT  |
| total_uncompressed_size | BIGINT  |


### Parquet Schema
The `parquet_schema` function can be used to query the internal schema contained within a Parquet file. Note that this is the schema as it is contained within the metadata of the Parquet file. If you want to figure out the column names and types contained within a Parquet file it is easier to use `DESCRIBE`.

```sql
-- fetch the column names and column types
DESCRIBE SELECT * FROM 'test.parquet';
-- fetch the internal schema of a parquet file
SELECT * FROM parquet_schema('test.parquet');
```

Below is a table of the columns returned by `parquet_schema`.

|      Field      |  Type   |
|-----------------|---------|
| file_name       | VARCHAR |
| name            | VARCHAR |
| type            | VARCHAR |
| type_length     | VARCHAR |
| repetition_type | VARCHAR |
| num_children    | BIGINT  |
| converted_type  | VARCHAR |
| scale           | BIGINT  |
| precision       | BIGINT  |
| field_id        | BIGINT  |
| logical_type    | VARCHAR |

### Writing to Parquet Files
DuckDB also has support for writing to Parquet files using the `COPY` statement syntax. See the [Copy Statement page](/docs/sql/statements/copy) for details, including all possible parameters for the copy statement.

Parameter values can be passed in with or without wrapping in single quotes.

You can specify which compression format should be used using the `CODEC` parameter (options: `UNCOMPRESSED`, `SNAPPY` (default), `ZSTD`, `GZIP`). `COMPRESSION` is an alias for `CODEC` and can be used instead with the same options. 

The `ROW_GROUP_SIZE` parameter specifies the minimum number of rows in a parquet row group, with a minimum value equal to DuckDB's vector size (currently 2048, but adjustable when compiling DuckDB). A parquet row group is a partition of rows, consisting of a column chunk for each column in the dataset. Compression algorithms are only applied per row group, so the larger the row group size, the more opportunities to compress the data. DuckDB can read parquet row groups in parallel even within the same file and uses predicate pushdown to only scan the row groups whose metadata ranges match the `WHERE` clause of the query. However there is some overhead associated with reading the metadata in each group. A good approach would be to ensure that within each file, the total number of row groups is at least as large as the number of CPU threads used to query that file. More row groups beyond the thread count would improve the speed of highly selective queries, but slow down queries that must scan the whole file like aggregations.

```sql
-- write a query to a snappy compressed parquet file
COPY (SELECT * FROM tbl) TO 'result-snappy.parquet' (FORMAT 'parquet')
-- write "tbl" to a zstd compressed parquet file
COPY tbl TO 'result-zstd.parquet' (FORMAT 'PARQUET', CODEC 'ZSTD')
-- write a csv file to an uncompressed parquet file
COPY 'test.csv' TO 'result-uncompressed.parquet' (FORMAT 'PARQUET', CODEC 'UNCOMPRESSED')
-- write a query to a parquet file with ZSTD compression (same as CODEC) and row_group_size
COPY (FROM generate_series(100000)) TO 'row-groups-zstd.parquet' (FORMAT PARQUET, COMPRESSION ZSTD, ROW_GROUP_SIZE 100000);
```

DuckDB's `EXPORT` command can be used to export an entire database to a series of Parquet files. See the [Export statement documentation](../sql/statements/export) for more details.
```sql
-- export the table contents of the entire database as parquet
EXPORT DATABASE 'target_directory' (FORMAT PARQUET);
```

### Installing and loading `parquet` extension

The support for `parquet` files is enabled via extension. The extension is bundled with almost all clients. However, if your client does not bundle the Parquet extension, the extension must be installed and loaded separately.

```sql
-- run once
INSTALL parquet;
-- run before usage
LOAD parquet;
```
