docs/sql/functions/char.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Text Functions
selected: Documentation/Functions/Text Functions
expanded: Functions
---
This section describes functions and operators for examining and manipulating string values. `␣` denotes a space character.

| Function | Description | Example | Result |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| *`string`* `^@` *`search_string`* | Alias for `starts_with`. | `'abc' ^@ 'a'` | `true` |
| *`string`* `||` *`string`* | String concatenation | `'Duck' || 'DB'` | `DuckDB` |
| *`string`*`[`*`index`*`]` | Alias for `array_extract`. | `'DuckDB'[4]` | `'k'` |
| *`string`*`[`*`begin`*`:`*`end`*`]` | Alias for `array_slice`. Missing arguments are interprete as `NULL`s. | `'DuckDB'[:4]` | `'Duck'` |
| `array_extract(`*`list`*`, `*`index`*`)` | Extract a single character using a (1-based) index. | `array_extract('DuckDB', 2)` | `'u'` |
| `array_slice(`*`list`*`, `*`begin`*`, `*`end`*`)` | Extract a string using slice conventions. `NULL`s are interpreted as the bounds of the string. Negative values are accepted. | `array_slice('DuckDB', 5, NULL)` | `'DB'` |
| `ascii(`*`string`*`)`| Returns an integer that represents the Unicode code point of the first character of the *string* | `ascii('Ω')` | `937` |
| `bar(`*`x`*`, `*`min`*`, `*`max`*`[, `*`width`*`])` | Draw a band whose width is proportional to (*x* - *min*) and equal to *width* characters when *x* = *max*. *width* defaults to 80. | `bar(5, 0, 20, 10)` | `██▌` |
| `base64(`*`blob`*`)`| Convert a blob to a base64 encoded string. Alias of to_base64. | `base64('A'::blob)` | `'QQ=='` |
| `bit_length(`*`string`*`)`| Number of bits in a string. | `bit_length('abc')` | `24` |
| `concat(`*`string`*`, ...)` | Concatenate many strings together | `concat('Hello', ' ', 'World')` | `Hello World` |
| `concat_ws(`*`separator`*`, `*`string`*`, ...)` | Concatenate strings together separated by the specified separator | `concat_ws(',', 'Banana', 'Apple', 'Melon')` | `Banana,Apple,Melon` |
| `contains(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)` | Return true if *search_string* is found within *string* | `contains('abc','a')` | `true` |
| `format(`*`format`*`, `*`parameters`*`...)` | Formats a string using fmt syntax | `format('Benchmark "{}" took {} seconds', 'CSV', 42)` | `Benchmark "CSV" took 42 seconds` |
| `from_base64(`*`string`*`)`| Convert a base64 encoded string to a character string. | `from_base64('QQ==')` | `'A'` |
| `hash(`*`value`*`)` | Returns an integer with the hash of the *value* | `hash('🦆')` | `2595805878642663834` |
| `instr(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)`| Return location of first occurrence of `search_string` in `string`, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `instr('test test','es')` | 2 |
| `lcase(`*`string`*`)` | Alias of `lower`. Convert *string* to lower case | `lcase('Hello')` | `hello` |
| `left(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the left-most count characters | `left('Hello🦆', 2)` | `He` |
| `left_grapheme(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the left-most grapheme clusters | `left_grapheme('🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️', 1)` | `🤦🏼‍♂️` |
| `length(`*`string`*`)` | Number of characters in *string* | `length('Hello🦆')` | `6` |
| `length_grapheme(`*`string`*`)` | Number of grapheme clusters in *string* | `length_grapheme('🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️')` | `2` |
| *`string`*` LIKE `*`target`* | Returns true if the *string* matches the like specifier (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `'hello' LIKE '%lo'` | `true` |
| `like_escape(`*`string`*`, `*`like_specifier`*`, `*`escape_character`*`)` | Returns true if the *string* matches the *like_specifier* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)). *escape_character* is used to search for wildcard characters in the *string*. | `like_escape('a%c', 'a$%c', '$')` | `true` |
| `list_element(`*`string`*`, `*`index`*`)` | An alias for `array_extract`. | `list_element('DuckDB', 2)` | `'u'` |
| `list_extract(`*`string`*`, `*`index`*`)` | An alias for `array_extract`. | `list_extract('DuckDB', 2)` | `'u'` |
| `lower(`*`string`*`)` | Convert *string* to lower case | `lower('Hello')` | `hello` |
| `lpad(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`, `*`character`*`)`| Pads the *string*  with the character from the left until it has count characters | `lpad('hello', 10, '>')` | `>>>>>hello` |
| `ltrim(`*`string`*`)`| Removes any spaces from the left side of the *string* | `ltrim('␣␣␣␣test␣␣')` | `test␣␣` |
| `ltrim(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Removes any occurrences of any of the *characters* from the left side of the *string* | `ltrim('>>>>test<<', '><')` | `test<<` |
| `md5(`*`value`*`)` | Returns the [MD5 hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5) of the *value*  | `md5('123')` | `'202cb962ac59075b964b07152d234b70'` |
| `nfc_normalize(`*`string`*`)`| Convert string to Unicode NFC normalized string. Useful for comparisons and ordering if text data is mixed between NFC normalized and not. | `nfc_normalize('ardèch')` | ``arde`ch`` |
| `not_like_escape(`*`string`*`, `*`like_specifier`*`, `*`escape_character`*`)` | Returns false if the *string* matches the *like_specifier* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)). *escape_character* is used to search for wildcard characters in the *string*. | `like_escape('a%c', 'a$%c', '$')` | `true` |
| `ord(`*`string`*`)`| Return ASCII character code of the leftmost character in a string.  | `ord('ü')` | `252` |
| `position(`*`search_string`*` in `*`string`*`)` | Return location of first occurrence of `search_string` in `string`, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `position('b' in 'abc')` | `2` |
| `prefix(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)` | Return true if *string* starts with *search_string*. | `prefix('abc', 'ab')` | `true` |
| `printf(`*`format`*`, `*`parameters`*`...)` | Formats a *string* using printf syntax | `printf('Benchmark "%s" took %d seconds', 'CSV', 42)` | `Benchmark "CSV" took 42 seconds`     |
| `regexp_full_match(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)`| Returns true if the entire *string* matches the *regex* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `regexp_full_match('anabanana', '(an)*')` | `false` |
| `regexp_matches(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)`| Returns true if a part of *string* matches the *regex* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `regexp_matches('anabanana', '(an)*')` | `true` |
| `regexp_replace(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`, `*`replacement`*`, `*`modifiers`*`)`| Replaces the first occurrence of *regex* with the *replacement*, use `'g'` modifier to replace all occurrences instead (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `select regexp_replace('hello', '[lo]', '-')` | `he-lo` |
| `regexp_split_to_array(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)` | Alias of `string_split_regex`. Splits the *string* along the *regex* | `regexp_split_to_array('hello␣world; 42', ';?␣')` | `['hello', 'world', '42']` |
| `regexp_extract(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`[, `*`group`*` = 0])` | Split the *string* along the *regex* and extract first occurrence of *group* | `regexp_extract('hello_world', '([a-z ]+)_?', 1)` | `hello` |
| `regexp_extract_all(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`[, `*`group`*` = 0])` | Split the *string* along the *regex* and extract all occurrences of *group* | `regexp_extract_all('hello_world', '([a-z ]+)_?', 1)` | `[hello, world]` |
| `repeat(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Repeats the *string* *count* number of times | `repeat('A', 5)` | `AAAAA` |
| `replace(`*`string`*`, `*`source`*`, `*`target`*`)`| Replaces any occurrences of the *source* with *target* in *string* | `replace('hello', 'l', '-')` | `he--o` |
| `reverse(`*`string`*`)`| Reverses the *string* | `reverse('hello')` | `olleh` |
| `right(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the right-most *count* characters | `right('Hello🦆', 3)` | `lo🦆` |
| `right_grapheme(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the right-most *count* grapheme clusters | `right_grapheme('🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️', 1)` | `🤦🏽‍♀️` |
| `rpad(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`, `*`character`*`)`| Pads the *string* with the character from the right until it has *count* characters | `rpad('hello', 10, '<')` | `hello<<<<<` |
| `rtrim(`*`string`*`)`| Removes any spaces from the right side of the *string* | `rtrim('␣␣␣␣test␣␣')` | `␣␣␣␣test` |
| `rtrim(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Removes any occurrences of any of the *characters* from the right side of the *string* | `rtrim('>>>>test<<', '><')` | `>>>>test` |
| `split_part(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`, `*`index`*`)` | Split the *string* along the *separator* and return the data at the (1-based) *index* of the list. If the *index* is outside the bounds of the list, return an empty string (to match Postgres behavior). | `split_part('a|b|c', '|', 2)` | `b` |
| `starts_with(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)`| Return true if *string* begins with *search_string* | `starts_with('abc','a')` | `true` |
| *`string`*` SIMILAR TO `*`regex`* | Returns `true` if the *string* matches the *regex*; identical to `regexp_full_match` (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `'hello' SIMILAR TO 'l+'` | `false` |
| `strlen(`*`string`*`)` | Number of bytes in *string* | `strlen('🦆')` | `4` |
| `strpos(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)`| Alias of `instr`. Return location of first occurrence of *search_string* in *string*, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `strpos('test test','es')` | 2 |
| `strip_accents(`*`string`*`)`| Strips accents from *string* | `strip_accents('mühleisen')` | `muhleisen` |
| `str_split(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`)` | Alias of `string_split`. Splits the *string* along the *separator* | `str_split('hello␣world', '␣')` | `['hello', 'world']` |
| `str_split_regex(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)` | Alias of `string_split_regex`. Splits the *string* along the *regex* | `str_split_regex('hello␣world; 42', ';?␣')` | `['hello', 'world', '42']` |
| `string_split(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`)` | Splits the *string* along the *separator* | `string_split('hello␣world', '␣')` | `['hello', 'world']` |
| `string_split_regex(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)` | Splits the *string* along the *regex* | `string_split_regex('hello␣world; 42', ';?␣')` | `['hello', 'world', '42']` |
| `string_to_array(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`)` | Alias of `string_split`. Splits the *string* along the *separator* | `string_to_array('hello␣world', '␣')` | `['hello', 'world']` |
| `substr(`*`string`*`, `*`start`*`, `*`length`*`)` | Alias of `substring`. Extract substring of *length* characters starting from character *start*. Note that a *start* value of `1` refers to the *first* character of the string. | `substr('Hello', 2, 2)` | `el` |
| `substring(`*`string`*`, `*`start`*`, `*`length`*`)` | Extract substring of *length* characters starting from character *start*. Note that a *start* value of `1` refers to the *first* character of the string. | `substring('Hello', 2, 2)` | `el` |
| `substring_grapheme(`*`string`*`, `*`start`*`, `*`length`*`)` | Extract substring of *length* grapheme clusters starting from character *start*. Note that a *start* value of `1` refers to the *first* character of the string. | `substring_grapheme('🦆🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️🦆', 3, 2)` | `🤦🏽‍♀️🦆` |
| `suffix(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)` | Return true if *string* ends with *search_string*. | `suffix('abc', 'bc')` | `true` |
| `strpos(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Alias of `instr`. Return location of first occurrence of *characters* in *string*, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `strpos('test test','es')` | 2 |
| `to_base64(`*`blob`*`)`| Convert a blob to a base64 encoded string. Alias of base64. | `to_base64('A'::blob)` | `QQ==` |
| `trim(`*`string`*`)`| Removes any spaces from either side of the *string* | `trim('␣␣␣␣test␣␣')` | `test` |
| `trim(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Removes any occurrences of any of the *characters* from either side of the *string* | `trim('>>>>test<<', '><')` | `test` |
| `ucase(`*`string`*`)`| Alias of `upper`. Convert *string* to upper case | `ucase('Hello')` | `HELLO` |
| `unicode(`*`string`*`)`| Returns the unicode code of the first character of the *string* | `unicode('ü')` | `252` |
| `upper(`*`string`*`)`| Convert *string* to upper case | `upper('Hello')` | `HELLO` |


## Text Similarity Functions
These functions are used to measure the similarity of two strings using various metrics.

| Function | Description | Example | Result |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| `editdist3(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | Alias of `levenshtein` for SQLite compatibility. The minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions or substitutions) required to change one string to the other. Different case is considered different. | `editdist3('duck','db')` | 3 |
| `hamming(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The number of positions with different characters for 2 strings of equal length. Different case is considered different. | `hamming('duck','luck')` | 1 |
| `jaccard(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The Jaccard similarity between two strings. Different case is considered different. Returns a number between 0 and 1. | `jaccard('duck','luck')` | 0.6 |
| `jaro_similarity(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The Jaro similarity between two strings. Different case is considered different. Returns a number between 0 and 1. | `jaro_similarity('duck','duckdb')` | 0.88 |
| `jaro_winkler_similarity(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The Jaro-Winkler similarity between two strings. Different case is considered different. Returns a number between 0 and 1. | `jaro_winkler_similarity('duck','duckdb')` | 0.93 |
| `levenshtein(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions or substitutions) required to change one string to the other. Different case is considered different. | `levenshtein('duck','db')` | 3 |
| `mismatches(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The number of positions with different characters for 2 strings of equal length. Different case is considered different. | `mismatches('duck','luck')` | 1 |

Commit message:

add documentation for damerau_levenshtein function

docs/sql/functions/char.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Text Functions
selected: Documentation/Functions/Text Functions
expanded: Functions
---
This section describes functions and operators for examining and manipulating string values. `␣` denotes a space character.

| Function | Description | Example | Result |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| *`string`* `^@` *`search_string`* | Alias for `starts_with`. | `'abc' ^@ 'a'` | `true` |
| *`string`* `||` *`string`* | String concatenation | `'Duck' || 'DB'` | `DuckDB` |
| *`string`*`[`*`index`*`]` | Alias for `array_extract`. | `'DuckDB'[4]` | `'k'` |
| *`string`*`[`*`begin`*`:`*`end`*`]` | Alias for `array_slice`. Missing arguments are interprete as `NULL`s. | `'DuckDB'[:4]` | `'Duck'` |
| `array_extract(`*`list`*`, `*`index`*`)` | Extract a single character using a (1-based) index. | `array_extract('DuckDB', 2)` | `'u'` |
| `array_slice(`*`list`*`, `*`begin`*`, `*`end`*`)` | Extract a string using slice conventions. `NULL`s are interpreted as the bounds of the string. Negative values are accepted. | `array_slice('DuckDB', 5, NULL)` | `'DB'` |
| `ascii(`*`string`*`)`| Returns an integer that represents the Unicode code point of the first character of the *string* | `ascii('Ω')` | `937` |
| `bar(`*`x`*`, `*`min`*`, `*`max`*`[, `*`width`*`])` | Draw a band whose width is proportional to (*x* - *min*) and equal to *width* characters when *x* = *max*. *width* defaults to 80. | `bar(5, 0, 20, 10)` | `██▌` |
| `base64(`*`blob`*`)`| Convert a blob to a base64 encoded string. Alias of to_base64. | `base64('A'::blob)` | `'QQ=='` |
| `bit_length(`*`string`*`)`| Number of bits in a string. | `bit_length('abc')` | `24` |
| `concat(`*`string`*`, ...)` | Concatenate many strings together | `concat('Hello', ' ', 'World')` | `Hello World` |
| `concat_ws(`*`separator`*`, `*`string`*`, ...)` | Concatenate strings together separated by the specified separator | `concat_ws(',', 'Banana', 'Apple', 'Melon')` | `Banana,Apple,Melon` |
| `contains(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)` | Return true if *search_string* is found within *string* | `contains('abc','a')` | `true` |
| `format(`*`format`*`, `*`parameters`*`...)` | Formats a string using fmt syntax | `format('Benchmark "{}" took {} seconds', 'CSV', 42)` | `Benchmark "CSV" took 42 seconds` |
| `from_base64(`*`string`*`)`| Convert a base64 encoded string to a character string. | `from_base64('QQ==')` | `'A'` |
| `hash(`*`value`*`)` | Returns an integer with the hash of the *value* | `hash('🦆')` | `2595805878642663834` |
| `instr(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)`| Return location of first occurrence of `search_string` in `string`, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `instr('test test','es')` | 2 |
| `lcase(`*`string`*`)` | Alias of `lower`. Convert *string* to lower case | `lcase('Hello')` | `hello` |
| `left(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the left-most count characters | `left('Hello🦆', 2)` | `He` |
| `left_grapheme(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the left-most grapheme clusters | `left_grapheme('🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️', 1)` | `🤦🏼‍♂️` |
| `length(`*`string`*`)` | Number of characters in *string* | `length('Hello🦆')` | `6` |
| `length_grapheme(`*`string`*`)` | Number of grapheme clusters in *string* | `length_grapheme('🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️')` | `2` |
| *`string`*` LIKE `*`target`* | Returns true if the *string* matches the like specifier (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `'hello' LIKE '%lo'` | `true` |
| `like_escape(`*`string`*`, `*`like_specifier`*`, `*`escape_character`*`)` | Returns true if the *string* matches the *like_specifier* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)). *escape_character* is used to search for wildcard characters in the *string*. | `like_escape('a%c', 'a$%c', '$')` | `true` |
| `list_element(`*`string`*`, `*`index`*`)` | An alias for `array_extract`. | `list_element('DuckDB', 2)` | `'u'` |
| `list_extract(`*`string`*`, `*`index`*`)` | An alias for `array_extract`. | `list_extract('DuckDB', 2)` | `'u'` |
| `lower(`*`string`*`)` | Convert *string* to lower case | `lower('Hello')` | `hello` |
| `lpad(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`, `*`character`*`)`| Pads the *string*  with the character from the left until it has count characters | `lpad('hello', 10, '>')` | `>>>>>hello` |
| `ltrim(`*`string`*`)`| Removes any spaces from the left side of the *string* | `ltrim('␣␣␣␣test␣␣')` | `test␣␣` |
| `ltrim(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Removes any occurrences of any of the *characters* from the left side of the *string* | `ltrim('>>>>test<<', '><')` | `test<<` |
| `md5(`*`value`*`)` | Returns the [MD5 hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5) of the *value*  | `md5('123')` | `'202cb962ac59075b964b07152d234b70'` |
| `nfc_normalize(`*`string`*`)`| Convert string to Unicode NFC normalized string. Useful for comparisons and ordering if text data is mixed between NFC normalized and not. | `nfc_normalize('ardèch')` | ``arde`ch`` |
| `not_like_escape(`*`string`*`, `*`like_specifier`*`, `*`escape_character`*`)` | Returns false if the *string* matches the *like_specifier* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)). *escape_character* is used to search for wildcard characters in the *string*. | `like_escape('a%c', 'a$%c', '$')` | `true` |
| `ord(`*`string`*`)`| Return ASCII character code of the leftmost character in a string.  | `ord('ü')` | `252` |
| `position(`*`search_string`*` in `*`string`*`)` | Return location of first occurrence of `search_string` in `string`, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `position('b' in 'abc')` | `2` |
| `prefix(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)` | Return true if *string* starts with *search_string*. | `prefix('abc', 'ab')` | `true` |
| `printf(`*`format`*`, `*`parameters`*`...)` | Formats a *string* using printf syntax | `printf('Benchmark "%s" took %d seconds', 'CSV', 42)` | `Benchmark "CSV" took 42 seconds`     |
| `regexp_full_match(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)`| Returns true if the entire *string* matches the *regex* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `regexp_full_match('anabanana', '(an)*')` | `false` |
| `regexp_matches(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)`| Returns true if a part of *string* matches the *regex* (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `regexp_matches('anabanana', '(an)*')` | `true` |
| `regexp_replace(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`, `*`replacement`*`, `*`modifiers`*`)`| Replaces the first occurrence of *regex* with the *replacement*, use `'g'` modifier to replace all occurrences instead (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `select regexp_replace('hello', '[lo]', '-')` | `he-lo` |
| `regexp_split_to_array(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)` | Alias of `string_split_regex`. Splits the *string* along the *regex* | `regexp_split_to_array('hello␣world; 42', ';?␣')` | `['hello', 'world', '42']` |
| `regexp_extract(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`[, `*`group`*` = 0])` | Split the *string* along the *regex* and extract first occurrence of *group* | `regexp_extract('hello_world', '([a-z ]+)_?', 1)` | `hello` |
| `regexp_extract_all(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`[, `*`group`*` = 0])` | Split the *string* along the *regex* and extract all occurrences of *group* | `regexp_extract_all('hello_world', '([a-z ]+)_?', 1)` | `[hello, world]` |
| `repeat(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Repeats the *string* *count* number of times | `repeat('A', 5)` | `AAAAA` |
| `replace(`*`string`*`, `*`source`*`, `*`target`*`)`| Replaces any occurrences of the *source* with *target* in *string* | `replace('hello', 'l', '-')` | `he--o` |
| `reverse(`*`string`*`)`| Reverses the *string* | `reverse('hello')` | `olleh` |
| `right(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the right-most *count* characters | `right('Hello🦆', 3)` | `lo🦆` |
| `right_grapheme(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`)`| Extract the right-most *count* grapheme clusters | `right_grapheme('🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️', 1)` | `🤦🏽‍♀️` |
| `rpad(`*`string`*`, `*`count`*`, `*`character`*`)`| Pads the *string* with the character from the right until it has *count* characters | `rpad('hello', 10, '<')` | `hello<<<<<` |
| `rtrim(`*`string`*`)`| Removes any spaces from the right side of the *string* | `rtrim('␣␣␣␣test␣␣')` | `␣␣␣␣test` |
| `rtrim(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Removes any occurrences of any of the *characters* from the right side of the *string* | `rtrim('>>>>test<<', '><')` | `>>>>test` |
| `split_part(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`, `*`index`*`)` | Split the *string* along the *separator* and return the data at the (1-based) *index* of the list. If the *index* is outside the bounds of the list, return an empty string (to match Postgres behavior). | `split_part('a|b|c', '|', 2)` | `b` |
| `starts_with(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)`| Return true if *string* begins with *search_string* | `starts_with('abc','a')` | `true` |
| *`string`*` SIMILAR TO `*`regex`* | Returns `true` if the *string* matches the *regex*; identical to `regexp_full_match` (see [Pattern Matching](../../sql/functions/patternmatching)) | `'hello' SIMILAR TO 'l+'` | `false` |
| `strlen(`*`string`*`)` | Number of bytes in *string* | `strlen('🦆')` | `4` |
| `strpos(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)`| Alias of `instr`. Return location of first occurrence of *search_string* in *string*, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `strpos('test test','es')` | 2 |
| `strip_accents(`*`string`*`)`| Strips accents from *string* | `strip_accents('mühleisen')` | `muhleisen` |
| `str_split(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`)` | Alias of `string_split`. Splits the *string* along the *separator* | `str_split('hello␣world', '␣')` | `['hello', 'world']` |
| `str_split_regex(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)` | Alias of `string_split_regex`. Splits the *string* along the *regex* | `str_split_regex('hello␣world; 42', ';?␣')` | `['hello', 'world', '42']` |
| `string_split(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`)` | Splits the *string* along the *separator* | `string_split('hello␣world', '␣')` | `['hello', 'world']` |
| `string_split_regex(`*`string`*`, `*`regex`*`)` | Splits the *string* along the *regex* | `string_split_regex('hello␣world; 42', ';?␣')` | `['hello', 'world', '42']` |
| `string_to_array(`*`string`*`, `*`separator`*`)` | Alias of `string_split`. Splits the *string* along the *separator* | `string_to_array('hello␣world', '␣')` | `['hello', 'world']` |
| `substr(`*`string`*`, `*`start`*`, `*`length`*`)` | Alias of `substring`. Extract substring of *length* characters starting from character *start*. Note that a *start* value of `1` refers to the *first* character of the string. | `substr('Hello', 2, 2)` | `el` |
| `substring(`*`string`*`, `*`start`*`, `*`length`*`)` | Extract substring of *length* characters starting from character *start*. Note that a *start* value of `1` refers to the *first* character of the string. | `substring('Hello', 2, 2)` | `el` |
| `substring_grapheme(`*`string`*`, `*`start`*`, `*`length`*`)` | Extract substring of *length* grapheme clusters starting from character *start*. Note that a *start* value of `1` refers to the *first* character of the string. | `substring_grapheme('🦆🤦🏼‍♂️🤦🏽‍♀️🦆', 3, 2)` | `🤦🏽‍♀️🦆` |
| `suffix(`*`string`*`, `*`search_string`*`)` | Return true if *string* ends with *search_string*. | `suffix('abc', 'bc')` | `true` |
| `strpos(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Alias of `instr`. Return location of first occurrence of *characters* in *string*, counting from 1. Returns 0 if no match found. | `strpos('test test','es')` | 2 |
| `to_base64(`*`blob`*`)`| Convert a blob to a base64 encoded string. Alias of base64. | `to_base64('A'::blob)` | `QQ==` |
| `trim(`*`string`*`)`| Removes any spaces from either side of the *string* | `trim('␣␣␣␣test␣␣')` | `test` |
| `trim(`*`string`*`, `*`characters`*`)`| Removes any occurrences of any of the *characters* from either side of the *string* | `trim('>>>>test<<', '><')` | `test` |
| `ucase(`*`string`*`)`| Alias of `upper`. Convert *string* to upper case | `ucase('Hello')` | `HELLO` |
| `unicode(`*`string`*`)`| Returns the unicode code of the first character of the *string* | `unicode('ü')` | `252` |
| `upper(`*`string`*`)`| Convert *string* to upper case | `upper('Hello')` | `HELLO` |


## Text Similarity Functions
These functions are used to measure the similarity of two strings using various metrics.

| Function | Description | Example | Result |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
| `editdist3(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | Alias of `levenshtein` for SQLite compatibility. The minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions or substitutions) required to change one string to the other. Different case is considered different. | `editdist3('duck','db')` | 3 |
| `hamming(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The number of positions with different characters for 2 strings of equal length. Different case is considered different. | `hamming('duck','luck')` | 1 |
| `jaccard(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The Jaccard similarity between two strings. Different case is considered different. Returns a number between 0 and 1. | `jaccard('duck','luck')` | 0.6 |
| `jaro_similarity(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The Jaro similarity between two strings. Different case is considered different. Returns a number between 0 and 1. | `jaro_similarity('duck','duckdb')` | 0.88 |
| `jaro_winkler_similarity(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The Jaro-Winkler similarity between two strings. Different case is considered different. Returns a number between 0 and 1. | `jaro_winkler_similarity('duck','duckdb')` | 0.93 |
| `levenshtein(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions or substitutions) required to change one string to the other. Different case is considered different. | `levenshtein('duck','db')` | 3 |
| `damerau_levenshtein(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | Extension of Levenshtein distance to also include transposition of adjacent characters as an allowed edit operation. In other words, the minimum number of edit operations (insertions, deletions, substitutions or transpositions) required to change one string to another. Different case is considered different. | `damerau_levenshtein('duckdb', 'udckbd')` | 2 |
| `mismatches(`*`string`*`,` *`string`*`)` | The number of positions with different characters for 2 strings of equal length. Different case is considered different. | `mismatches('duck','luck')` | 1 |
