docs/data/partitioning/hive_partitioning.md, before:

---
layout: docu
title: Hive Partitioning
---

### Examples

```sql
-- read data from a hive partitioned data set
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('orders/*/*/*.parquet', hive_partitioning=1);
-- write a table to a hive partitioned data set
COPY orders TO 'orders' (FORMAT PARQUET, PARTITION_BY (year, month));
```

### Hive Partitioning
Hive partitionining is a [partitioning strategy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database)) that is used to split a table into multiple files based on **partition keys**. The files are organized into folders. Within each folder, the **partition key** has a value that is determined by the name of the folder. 

Below is an example of a hive partitioned file hierarchy. The files are partitioned on two keys (`year` and `month`).

```
orders
├── year=2021
│    ├── month=1
│    │   ├── file1.parquet
│    │   └── file2.parquet
│    └── month=2
│        └── file3.parquet
└── year=2022
     ├── month=11
     │   ├── file4.parquet
     │   └── file5.parquet
     └── month=12
         └── file6.parquet
```

Files stored in this hierarchy can be read using the `hive_partitioning` flag.

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('orders/*/*/*.parquet', hive_partitioning=1);
```

When we specify the `hive_partitioning` flag, the values of the columns will be read from the directories.

#### Filter Pushdown
Filters on the partition keys are automatically pushed down into the files. This way the system skips reading files that are not necessary to answer a query. For example, consider the following query on the above dataset:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM parquet_scan('orders/*/*/*.parquet', hive_partitioning=1)
WHERE year=2022 AND month=11;
```

When executing this query, only the following files will be read:

```
orders
└── year=2022
     └── month=11
         ├── file4.parquet
         └── file5.parquet
```

#### Writing Partitioned Files

See the [Partitioned Writes](partitioned_writes) section.

Commit message:

added autodetection to hive_partitioning

docs/data/partitioning/hive_partitioning.md, after:

---
layout: docu
title: Hive Partitioning
---

### Examples

```sql
-- read data from a hive partitioned data set
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('orders/*/*/*.parquet', hive_partitioning=1);
-- write a table to a hive partitioned data set
COPY orders TO 'orders' (FORMAT PARQUET, PARTITION_BY (year, month));
```

### Hive Partitioning
Hive partitionining is a [partitioning strategy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database)) that is used to split a table into multiple files based on **partition keys**. The files are organized into folders. Within each folder, the **partition key** has a value that is determined by the name of the folder. 

Below is an example of a hive partitioned file hierarchy. The files are partitioned on two keys (`year` and `month`).

```
orders
├── year=2021
│    ├── month=1
│    │   ├── file1.parquet
│    │   └── file2.parquet
│    └── month=2
│        └── file3.parquet
└── year=2022
     ├── month=11
     │   ├── file4.parquet
     │   └── file5.parquet
     └── month=12
         └── file6.parquet
```

Files stored in this hierarchy can be read using the `hive_partitioning` flag.

```sql
SELECT * FROM parquet_scan('orders/*/*/*.parquet', hive_partitioning=1);
```

When we specify the `hive_partitioning` flag, the values of the columns will be read from the directories.

#### Filter Pushdown
Filters on the partition keys are automatically pushed down into the files. This way the system skips reading files that are not necessary to answer a query. For example, consider the following query on the above dataset:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM parquet_scan('orders/*/*/*.parquet', hive_partitioning=1)
WHERE year=2022 AND month=11;
```

When executing this query, only the following files will be read:

```
orders
└── year=2022
     └── month=11
         ├── file4.parquet
         └── file5.parquet
```

#### Autodetection
By default the system tries to infer if the provided files are in a hive partitioned hierarchy. And if so, the `HIVE_PARTITIONING` flag is enabled. The autodetection will look at the names of the folders and search for a 'key'='value' pattern. This behaviour can be overridden by setting the `HIVE_PARTITIONING` flag manually.

#### Writing Partitioned Files

See the [Partitioned Writes](partitioned_writes) section.
